 
 
 
 
RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
Enterprise Risk Management Framework  
 
 
NSSF/ERM/PD/03 
 
 
 
ISSUE NO. 02 
 
 
 
ISSUED BY: Management Representative 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
DOCUMENT APPROVAL PAGE 
 
 
 
 
           NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND 
 
DEPARTMENT:  
 
Risk 
Management 
 
Reference No.   
Revision No. 01 Date:   16/05/2025 
Prepared by: 
Mahmoud Sebit 
Maureen Emase 
Gideon Ngome 
 
TITLE:  
ERM 
Reviewed by: 
 
 
 
 
Chris Lokipi 
MANAGER, RISK MANAGEMENT 
Date: 16/05/2025 
Approved by:  
 
 
 
 
Mr. David Koross, MBS 
MANAGING TRUSTEE/CEO 
Date:  
 
 
 
 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
REVISION HISTORY OF DOCUMENTED INFORMATION 
 
DOCUMENT TITLE:  Enterprise Risk Management Framework  
 
Rev. 
No. DCR Ref. Date 
Chapter/ 
Clause/ 
Par. No 
Details of changes 
 
Addition – Underline/highlight  
Deletion – Strikethrough 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
4 
Table of contents 
 
  Page 
 Acronyms & Abbreviations 5 
1.0 Introduction  
 1.1. Objectives of the ERM Framework 6 
 1.2. Basis of preparation 7 
 1.3. ERM Definition 7 
 1.4 ERM Terminology 8 
2.0 ERM Policy Statement 9 
 2.1 Guiding principles 9 
 2.2 Risk  awareness culture 9 
3.0 NSSF Risk Management Systems 11 
 3.1   Objective setting 11 
 3.2 Linking risk with the Fund strategic & business plans 11 
 3.3 NSSF ERM process 11 
 3.4 Risk Assessment 12 
 3.4.1 Risk Identification 12 
 3.4.2 
3.5          
Risk Analysis   
Risk Evaluation 
13 
 3.6 Risk Response 14 
 3.7 Risk Monitoring 15 
 3.8 Risk Reporting 15 
 3.9 Risk Reporting Framework 15 
4.0 Roles & Responsibilities 17 
5.0 Compliance Policy 20 
 5.1 Responsibilities for Compliance 20 
 5.2 Compliance Reporting 20 
6.0 Implementation of the ERM 21 
 6.1 Revision of the ERM Framework 21 
   
 ANNEXES  
 NSSF Risk Assessment Matrix 22 
 TOR for the Audit & Risk Committee in relation to ERM 23 
 Risk Champions- Roles & Responsibilities 24 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
5 
Definitions 
 
Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) 
ERM is “a process, effected by an entity's Board of Trustees, management and other personnel, 
applied in strategy setting and across the enterpr ise, designed to identify potential events that 
may affect the entity, and manage risk to be within its risk appetite, to provide reasonable 
assurance regarding the achievement of entity objectives” Committee of Sponsoring 
Organizations of the Treadway Commission. (COSO) 
 
NSSF/Fund 
Means National Social Security Fund . The two terms are used interchangeably in the policy as 
appropriate. 
 
Business Unit 
Refers to a Department, Region, Branch, Section or Unit of NSSF. 
 
Event 
An occurrence or incident, from exte rnal or internal sources, that affects the achievement of the 
Funds objectives. Events can have negative consequence, positive consequence, or both. 
Events with negative consequence represent threats. Events with positive consequence 
represent opportunities. 
 
Risk 
The Fund defines “Risk” as: “The effect of uncertainty on objectives”  Risk relates to the 
occurrence of one or more future events that can have an impact on the Fund 's objectives. 
Objectives can be under achieved or overachieved due to risk. 
 
Impact  
The effect a risk will have on the Fund’s finances, information, operations and/or reputation if it 
occurs. 
 
Likelihood  
A chance of an event occurring  
 
Vulnerability  
The weakness of an asset or control that can be exploited by one or more threats 
 
Inherent risk  
Risks in the absence of any mitigating actions taken to reduce either the risk’s 
likelihood/vulnerability of occurrence or impact. DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
6 
Controls  
A measure that maintains and/or modifies risk. 
 
Residual risk  
Risk remaining after risk treatment . The remaining levels of risk after risk mitigation measures 
have been taken. 
 
Risk Assessment  
Process of identifying, analyzing and evaluating risks. 
 
Risk register  
A document of risk management systems, on which all significant risk factors for the Fund are 
identified, ranked and assigned.  
 
Risk appetite  
The amount of risk, on a broad level, an organization is willing to accept in pursuit of stakeholder 
value. This is based on informed decision on the impact & vulnerability of a particular risk. 
 
Risk tolerance  
The specific maximum risk that the Fund is willing to take regarding each relevant risk. 
 
Risk treatment  
The strategies put in place by the Fund to modify, reduce or eliminate the risk 
 
Annex A   
Control objectives and controls listed in table A1 of the ISO/IEC 27001:2022 
Statement of Applicability It is a summary of the Funds position on each of the 93 information 
security controls outlined in Annex A. 
 
Risk Owner  
Person or entity with the accountability and authority to manage a risk . Risk owners are staff 
with the primarily responsibility for particular risks and controls. 
 
Risk Champion 
An officer who supports and defends risk management cause. Therefore, a champion of risk 
management promote s its benefits, educate the business unit's managem ent and staff in the 
actions they need to take to implement it and will encourage them and support them in taking 
those actions. 
 
 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
7 
Management 
Refers to officers of the Fund in charge of a department, region, division, station, project, section 
or unit within the Fund. 
 
Process 
Refers to a set of interrelated or interacting activities which transform inputs into outputs in order 
to achieve desired results. 
 
Risk culture 
The set of shared attitudes, values and practices that characterize how the Authority con siders 
risks in its day-to-day activities. 
 
Risk Drivers 
These are the causes of risk events. 
 
Risk indicator 
These are measurements or parameters used by management to show how risky an event or 
activity is. They warn of the most obvious areas where probl ems may arise, thus the term Key 
Risk Indicators (KRI). 
 
Risk profile 
A documented and prioritized assessment of the range of specific risks faced by the Fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
8 
Acronyms and Abbreviations  
 
ARC Audit & Risk Committee 
BOT Board of Trustee’s 
BM Branch Managers 
COSO Committee of Sponsoring Organization s of the 
Treadway Commission 
ERM Enterprise Risk Management  
ERMF Enterprise Risk Management Framework 
HOD’s Heads of Departments 
ISO International Organization for Standardization 
MT Managing Trustee 
NT National Treasury 
NSSF/ the “Fund” National Social Security Fund 
RM Regional Managers 
Senior Management The Managing Trustee & General Managers 
SOA                                      Statement of Applicability 
DISRUPTION   Incident, whether anticipated or unanticipated, that 
causes unplanned, negative deviation from the 
expected delivery of products and services according 
to the Fund’s objectives. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
ISO 9001:2015   - Quality Management Systems 
ISO 27001:2022   - Information Security , Cyber Security and Privacy 
Protection                      Management Systems 
ISO 30401:2018   - Knowledge Management Systems 
ISO 9004:2018   - Quality Management-Quality of an Organization 
ISO 22301:2019        -    Business Continuity Management System 
 
 
ISO 31000 Risk Management  -     Principles and Guidelines. 
The COSO ERM    -  Integrated framework. 
 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
9 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
 
The core mandate of NSSF is to provide basic social security benefits to members upon 
retirement.   
The Fund recognizes that  risk is inherent to its operations and that managing risk 
effectively is critical to the immediate and future success or the very existence of the  
Fund. 
This policy recognizes that risks are caused by people , systems and external events. 
These causes of r isks trigger risk events which may include fraud (internal or external), 
workplace health and safety, environmental, business disruption, system failure, or 
damage to assets. The effects of such events have the potential to affect positively or 
negatively on the achievement of objectives. 
 
Risks have generally increased in today business environment due to a combination of 
reasons: 
 
1.1 Financial liberalization has opened the door to new and sometimes unfamiliar 
business lines and risk 
1.2 The operating environment  has become more volatile and unpredictable as a 
result of macroeconomic and regulatory policy changes 
1.3 Products continue to increase in complexity as competition intensifies 
1.4 Trading margin compression has intensified , coercing businesses to take 
greater risk in order to protect income, 
1.5 Customers are actively exercising their rights and choices, and have become very 
risk sensitive 
1.6 Fraud/ crime is becoming increasingly sophisticated. 
1.7 The new technology acquired has altered the risk equation, mitigating some r isks 
such as human error, while adding new ones. 
 
2.0 PURPOSE  
 
The aim of the Enterprise-Wide Risk Management is to give assurance that management 
always knows what is at risk and that the Fund does not suffer loss from risks that were 
either ignored or misunderstood. Active management of these risks is an essential part of 
the Fund’s operations and a key determin ant of its ability to maintain  a growing capital 
and earnings base. 
 
It is therefore imperative that all personnel have an in -depth understanding of the various 
risks that have bearing on the operations of NSSF and the types of risks that are 
associated with each line of the business, including support functions. DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
10 
3.0 OBJECTIVES OF ERM FRAMEWORK  
 
3.1 The objecting of this framework is to bring a structured app roach to risk 
management in the entire Fund. The ERM framework is a tool that is forward 
looking, anticipating any potential impediments/risks that can impact on the 
achievement of strategic objectives and proposing appropriate risks mitigation 
measures. This document is the overriding policy for overall risk management 
within the Fund. It is designed to ensure that: - 
 
3.1.1   The Board of Trustees and management have an active, structured, 
  and commonly shared knowledge of risks and priorities. 
3.1.2   There is a management structure that adequately identifies,   
  measures, monitors and controls the risks involved in various  
  products, operations, and lines of business. 
3.1.3   Management takes the right decisions in uncertain environment and 
  also establish pre-emptive strategies to enhance service delivery. 
3.1.4   Management understands the nature of risks and ensure that 
  necessary steps are taken to mitigate the potential negative  
  consequences. 
3.1.5   Management evaluates, prioritize s and address es the critical 
  risks and channel resources to these risks, ultimately improving 
  the utilization of resources and quality of services rendered. 
3.1.6   Roles and responsibilities are clearly defined for each   
  stakeholder in the ERM spectrum. 
3.1.7   Risk reporting is clearly defined and communicated. 
3.1.8   Resources are assigned to management of risks in a manner 
  to optimise the achievement of the Fund’s objectives. 
3.1.9   To ensure that all the current and future risk exposures of the  
  Fund are identified, assessed, quantified, appropriately  
  mitigated and managed. 
3.1.10   To enable compliance with appropriate regulations, wherever 
  applicable through the adoption of best practices. 
3.1.11   To assure stability and resilience in contribution collection. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
11 
4.0 BASIS OF PREPARATION OF THE ERM  
 
4.1 This fram ework has been developed to comply with the Kenyan Government 
(Treasury Circular 3/2009) directive on the implementation of an Institutional Risk 
Management Framework for Ken ya’s Public was enacted into law through the 
Public Finance Management Act and its  attendant regulations. The Mwongozo 
Code of Governance requires the Fund to have adequate systems and  processes 
of accountability, risk management and control. 
4.2 This policy links to other policies e.g. Information Security Policy, Business 
Continuity Polic y, Anti -fraud and Anti -Corruption Policy, Security Management 
Policy and Compliance Risk Management Policy. 
 
5.0 ERM POLICY GUIDING PRINCIPLES 
 
5.1 The Fund is committed to embedding risk management principles and 
practices into: 
 
5.1.1 Strategic and Operational plans 
5.1.2 Decision making process 
5.1.3 Business and financial processes 
5.1.4 All levels of the Fund; i.e. Division, Departments, Regions, Branches, and 
Huduma Centres 
5.1.5 On major projects undertaken  
5.1.6 On major transactions entered into with third parties. 
 
5.2 Risk management is based  on the proposition that it must produce value to 
the Fund - the benefit of reducing risk must be greater than the cost of its 
management. 
5.3 Risk Management is everybody’s responsibility, from the Board of Trustees 
to individual employees. 
5.4 Each business unit is expected to undertake risk assessments on no less 
than an annual basis and quarterly as may be determined by the Audit & 
Risk Committee of the Board of Trustees. 
5.5 Enterprise Risk Management will be integrated with major business 
processes such as strateg ic planning, business planning and operational 
management to ensure consistent consideration of risks in all decision -
making. 
5.6 The Fund’s guidelines, policies, procedures and processes will be consistent 
with this Framework. 
5.7 Risk Management is mandatory and not optional. DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
12 
6.0 Risk Awareness culture 
6.1 Risk management shall be integrated into the culture of the Fund. This will 
include mandate, leadership and commitment from the Board of Trustees. 
6.2 Risk culture is a term describing the values, beliefs, knowledge and 
understanding about risk shared by a group of people with a common 
purpose, in particular the employees of an organisation or of teams or 
groups within an organisation (Institute of Risk Management-IRM). 
6.3 Achieving a good risk awareness culture is ensured by establishing an 
appropriate risk architecture, strategy and protocols. 
 
6.4 Guiding principles 
6.4.1 A distinct and consistent tone from the BOT and senior management 
 in respect of risk taking and avoidance. 
6.4.2 A commitment to ethical principles, reflected in a concern with the  
 ethical profile of individuals and the application of ethics and the  
 consideration of wider stakeholder positions in decision making. 
6.4.3 A common acceptance through the organisation of the 
 importance of continuous management of risk, including clear 
 accountability for and ownership of specific risks and risk areas. 
6.4.4 Transparent and timely risk information flowing up and down the  
 organisation with adverse news rapidly communicated without fear of 
 blame. 
6.4.5 Encouragement of risk event reporting a nd whistle blowing, actively 
 seeking to learn from mistakes and near misses. 
6.4.6 No process or activity too large or too complex or too obscure for the 
 risks to be readily understood 
6.4.7 Appropriate risk taking behaviours are rewarded and encouraged and 
 inappropriate behaviours are challenged and sanctioned 
6.4.8 Risk management skills and knowledge valued, encouraged   
 and developed, with a properly resourced risk management   
 function and  widespread membership and support for   
 professional bodies. Professional qualifications as well as   
 technical training supported. 
6.4.9 Sufficient diversity of perspectives, values and beliefs to   
 ensure that the status quo is consistently and rigorously   
 challenged. 
6.4.10 Risk management shall be embedded in the Fund’s    
 Performance Management Systems. 
 
 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
7.0 NSSF RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS  
 
7.1 Risk Management Scope 
 
The Fund recognizes the following major categories of risk 
  
Risk Category Description 
 
Governance 
Risks 
Risks related to structure, accountability, transparency, 
policies, p rocedures and authorities in which the key 
directions and decisions of the organization are overseen: 
(i)  Board of Trustees independence & oversight 
(ii) Organisational culture & ethics 
(iii) Corporate Social responsibility 
(iv) Delegation of Authority 
Strategy 
Risks 
Risks associated with the Fund’s inability to formulate 
and/or execute a successful business 
Strategy. i.e., innovation, brand promotion, seizing market 
opportunities, new products, stakeholder’s needs, 
budgeting/allocation of resources, succession planning, 
obsolescing of existing product or services. 
Operational 
Risks 
Risks resulting from instances of inadequate or failed 
internal processes, people and systems or from external 
events. Risk of loss arising from inadequate IT systems, 
internal control lapses, fr aud, catastrophes or other 
operational problems which may result in unexpected 
losses. 
Financial 
Risks 
Risks related to poor financial management within the 
organisation leading to inadequate returns & cash flows to 
meet financial obligations and accurate ly account for 
financial transactions such as; Accounting for contributions, 
processing of benefits payments, liquidity management, 
poor investment decisions, property management losses, 
etc. 
Compliance 
Risks 
Risks related to non -compliance with applicabl e laws, 
regulations (i.e. RBA, NSSF Act, Treasury Circulars, etc) 
and relevant internal & external policies. This could also 
affect the Fund’s reputation. DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
14 
Information 
Security 
Risks 
These are risks that are associated with the loss of 
preservation of Conf identiality Integrity and Availability of 
information. In relation to the requirement of the Information 
Security Management System Standard, ISO/IEC 
27001:2013, a detailed process has been defined in the 
Information Security Risk Assessment and Treatment 
Process (Annex 12.4). 
Business 
Continuity 
Risks 
These are risks that affect continuity of critical/prioritized 
activities in the business processes. 
Project risks Project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it 
occurs, has an effect on at least one project objective 
Fraud Risks These are risks with the potential for intentional act of 
deception committed to secure an unfair or un lawful gain 
which can result in financial loss, reputational damages and 
regulatory penalties 
 
Health & 
Safety  
These are risks with the potential for harm to employees, 
contractors, visitors or the public as a result of unsafe 
working conditions, hazardous activities or noncompliance 
with OSHA regulations. 
Environment
al, Social & 
Governance 
(ESG) 
These are risks ar ising from environmental, social or 
governance issues that can negatively affect an 
organizational performance, stake holders trust, regulatory 
compliance and ability to operate sustainably e.g. climate 
change, pollution, biodiversity loss 
 
7.2 Linking risk with the Fund’s strategic & business plans 
 
7.2.1 There shall be a clear and meaningful reference to the management 
of risks within the Fund’s strategic and business plans. Board of 
Trustees & Senior management shall ensure that the management of 
risk is consider ed as part of the strategic objectives and become an 
integral part of the Fund’s day to day operations. 
7.2.2 To ensure that the above policy is implemented and that the 
significance of managing risk is cascaded throughout all areas of the 
Fund’s operations, the following shall be implemented. 
7.2.3 Risk management shall be considered as part of decision making 
process and embedded within work plans and budgets; DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
15 
7.2.4 Risk Management framework shall be communicated to all employees 
in the Fund. 
7.2.5 Guidance and training shall be  given to Fund employees in order to 
ensure that they are able to properly understand and manage risks 
falling within their area of responsibility and accountability. 
7.2.6 Risk management shall be embedded in the performance 
management system of the Fund. 
 
7.3 NSSF’s Risk Management Process 
Risk management process in the Fund will be done in accordance with the ISO 
31000: 2018: Risk Management Principles and Guidelines. 
The Fund will adopt a continuous process with the following key steps: 
 
7.3.1 Establish the Context 
7.3.1.(i) Risk Assessment 
7.3.1.(i)(a) Risk identification 
7.3.1.(i)(b) Risk Analysis 
7.3.1.(i)(c) Evaluation 
 
7.3.2 Risk Response 
7.3.3 Risk Monitoring and Measurement 
7.3.4 Risk Reporting 
7.3.5 Improvement actions 
 
7.4 Establish the Context  
 Defining the strategic, organisational and risk management context covering 
corporate objectives, criteria and key elements, issues and stakeholders, to 
establish the role of the Fund. 
 
7.5 Risk Assessment 
 
7.5.1 Risk assessment shall be carried out at all levels of the Fund at least 
annually and as part of major decision making process. 
7.5.2 Risk Assessment i nvolves the pro cess of risk identification, risk 
analysis and evaluation. 
 
7.6 Risk Identification 
 
7.6.1 Risk identification  is the process of determining risks that could 
potentially prevent the achievement of the objectives of the Fund.  DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
7.6.2 An event is an occurrence that could affect strategy implementation or 
achievement of objectives. R isk is the possibility that an event will 
occur and adversely affect the achievement of objectives.  Events 
with negative impact represent risks while events with positive impact 
represent opportunities. Risks require immediate management 
actions to reduce them while opportunities can be channeled back 
into the strategy and objective-setting processes. 
7.6.3 The Fund will classify the identified risks into the categories indicated 
in the table below: 
 
7.7 Risk Analysis  
 
7.7.1 The identified risks will be measured and ranked using the NSSF Risk 
Assessment Matrix. The identified risks will be assessed and 
measured to determine their level (weight) and ranked so as to assign 
priorities using the NSSF R isk Assessment Matrix (Annex 12.1). The 
analysis shall be done based on two parameters. 
 
7.7.1.(i) The potential impact if the risk occurs (financial, 
stakeholders, reputation, business process & systems, etc) 
7.7.1.(ii) The likelihood: The likelihood of occurrence taking into  
consideration the existing controls that have been put in 
place. 
 
7.8 Risk Evaluation 
 
7.8.1 Risks will be ranked in terms of High (H), medium/ Moderate (M) and 
Low (L) as defined by the parameters in the Matrix. The colour code  
Table 3  below will be used.  High ris ks must be reported to Senior 
Management and require detailed treatment plans to reduce the risk 
to Low or Medium. 
7.8.2 Apply the risk acceptance criteria on the risk values to determine the 
risk significance and prioritize . All high risks are 1st priority, all  
medium risks are prioritized gradually in relation to the score.  
 
 
 
 
 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
Table 3 
Risk Ranking Colour 
Acceptance 
Criteria Recommendation Action 
High (H) 15 - 25 Unacceptable 
Controls must be implemented with immediate 
detailed action plan required at senior 
management and Board Level 
Medium /Moderate 
(M) 5 - 12 Tolerable 
Controls must be implemented needs 
management attention 
Low (L) 1 - 4 Acceptable Managed by normal activities/Only monitoring 
 
7.9 Risk Response 
 
7.9.1 The Fund’s Management shall ensure that appr opriate risk responses 
will be instituted to mitigate the identified risks to an acceptable level. 
7.9.2 Risk response is the activity of selecting and implementing 
appropriate control measures to modify the risk. Risk response 
includes as its major element, ris k control (or mitigation), but extends 
further to, risk avoidance, risk transfer, risk acceptance & exploiting 
the risk. 
7.9.3 In responding to risks management, the Fund will apply the followi ng 
key risk treatment options: - 
 
 Table 4 
Risk Treatment Options Description 
Treat 
Reduce/Mitigate 
Reduce the impact of the risk or 
vulnerability or both so that the 
exposure is reduced. Examples include: 
(i) Additional internal controls such as 
segregation of duties, assignment 
of responsibility and accountability 
(ii) Policies & procedures 
(iii) budgets and forecasts 
(iv) Implementing BCP programmes 
Terminate/Avoidance This is where the Fund decides to avoid 
the risk in its entirety. Some projects or 
actions could have too much associated 
risks and a deliberate decision is made 
not to proc eed or the scope and scale 
are changed. DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
18 
Transfer/ Share This is where the risk or a portion of it is 
transferred to a third party, i.e. 
insurance 
Tolerate/Accept Where an informed decision is made to 
accept the risk. No resources are 
allocated to the risks. 
Exploit risk Steps taken to leverage on 
opportunities. This could include 
revising the strategy and plans to take 
advantage of the opportunities. 
 
7.10 Risk Monitoring 
 
7.10.1  The Fund shall continuously monitor the risk throughout the Fund. 
 Continuous risk monitoring will give assurance that: 
 
7.10.1.(i) Risks are managed properly 
7.10.1.(ii) Risk response plans remain relevant and cost effective 
7.10.1.(iii) New risks exposures are effectively mitigated 
7.10.1.(iv) Resources are efficiently allocated/ re -allocated based on 
the risk profiles. 
 
7.10.2 Risks shall b e monitored through regular communications, periodic 
tests of controls for design effectiveness and relevance and through 
internal audit reviews. 
 
7.11 Risk Reporting  
 
7.11.1  Policy Statement: 
7.11.1.(i) Risk information shall be communicated both upwards & 
downward throughout the Fund to the relevant 
stakeholders. 
7.11.1.(i)(a) Reporting is a key element of the risk           
  management process. The Board of  
  Trustees and Senior Management must be 
  kept abreast of key risks and the actions 
  resulting from risk management activities. 
7.11.1.(i)(b) While risk management is the   
  responsibility of everyone in the Fund,  
  different categories in the Fund have  DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
19 
  different reporting requirements and  
  responsibilities at every level in the Fund                           
  i.e. Board of Trustees; Senior   
  Management; Operational Staff. 
 
7.11.2  Risk Reporting Framework 
 
7.11.2.(i) A number of reports will be generated. The table below 
summarises the reports, frequency, information contained 
and the use of the report: 
         Table 5 
Risk Report Frequency Information  Use of the Report 
Risk 
Advisory 
Adhoc Template 
capturing the 
risk as they 
are identified 
either by 
Internal Audit, 
Risk 
Department 
staff, or 
business unit 
Risk 
Champions. 
Used by the 
management to 
track risks and 
respond to the 
identified risks. 
 
Risk owners to 
comment on the 
risk response 
actions taken.  
Risk 
Management 
Report 
Adhoc All risk 
management 
reports done 
as per the 
work plan.  
Key risks and 
mitigations 
discussed with risk 
owners. 
Board Risk 
Management 
Report 
Quarterly Summarises 
of key 
strategic, 
operational, 
compliance 
and emerging 
risks noted 
during the 
quarter and 
the mitigating 
actions taken.  
Discussed with 
Senior 
Management and 
Risk Management 
Unit.  
 
Discussed at the 
Audit Committee 
meetings and BOT 
Corporate Risk 
Register Update 
Annually Fund-wide 
risks 
Used by Senior 
Management to DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
20 
 identification 
and the overall 
Risk Register 
updated. 
give an overall risk 
profile of the Fund.  
 
 
 
 
8.0 RISK APPETITE AND TOLERANCE 
 
Risk appetite determines the amount of risk that shall be considered accep table to 
take, in pursuit of corporate objectives. The risk appetite of the Fund will be set by 
the Board of Trustees from time to time and will be determined for each major risk 
type and documented in a separate risk appetite / tolerance statement. 
The se tting of a risk appetite recognises the fact that the Trustees of NSSF are 
willing and want a certain level of risk since it opens opportunities to meet and / or 
exceed certain objectives. This implies that a risk appetite is only appropriate for 
risks that have an upside (potential positive consequence). These risks are; Credit 
Risk, Market Risk and Strategic Risk. 
 
Certain risks have no recognised upside and as such would ideally be eliminated. 
However, elimination is usually not possible due to cost and benefits 
considerations. For these risks, the Fund therefore has a tolerance. 
 
Risk tolerance applies to, Operational Risk, Liquidity Risk, Strategic Risk and 
Market Risk. For these risks, mitigation strategies will be considered to the point 
that the cost of additional mitigation is expected to exceed the benefits of increased 
minimization. 
 
For risks involving any human deliberate acts such as non-compliance to regulatory 
or internal policies, corruption, fraud, drug abuse, sexual harassment, reputation 
damage, breakdown to information system, information integrity, risk of injury to 
staff and or customer, the appetite is zero and additional measures should be 
sought, as far as possible, to eliminate these types of risks. 
 
For the rating of likelihood and consequence used in the Risk and Control Self-
Assessment and in assessing indirect consequences when an incident is recorded, 
the Fund uses a rating of 1 to 5. The meaning of each scale of 1 to 5 is explained in 
the Risk Appetite Statement of the Fund. 
 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
21 
For reporting purposes, self-assessed risks and key risk indicators will be analysed 
using a five-point scale and classified into high (red), medium (amber) and low 
(green), in accordance with the risk appetite statement. For risks that are high (red) 
and me dium (amber), potential improvements must be implemented. Where no 
further improvements are possible or economic, the risk must either be avoided or 
formally accepted by Management. 
 
Risk identified shall be analysed on the basis of likelihood of occurrenc e and the 
consequences if they occur. The two dimensions will use a five-point scale. The 
risks will be ranked using the product of the likelihood score (L) and the 
consequence score (C) to determine its ranking score (R) and classified using a 
three level scale with corresponding colour schemes as follows: - 
 
 
RANK COLOUR SCHEME 
Low Green 
Medium Amber 
High Red 
 
9.0 RISK MANAGEMENT TOOLS 
 
Risk & Control Self-Assessment 
Tool used to conduct adequate risk assessment consistent with the Risk Identification, 
Analysis, Evaluation and Treatment of risks as per ISO 31000 Risk Management 
Process. 
 
Key Risk Indicators 
Proxies to monitors key risks identified across the organisation. It is consistent with 
Monitoring and Review stage of ISO 31000 Risk Management Process. 
 
Incident Management 
Central systems to record and manage risk incidents when they occur for analysis of 
weaknesses and also as a basis of data for future analysis. It is consistent with 
Monitoring and Review stage of ISO 31000 Risk management Process. 
 
Mitigation Action Tracking 
Central systems to record and manage all actions within the organisation. It is  consistent 
with Monitoring & Review and Communicate & Consult stage of ISO 31000 Risk 
Management Process. 
 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
22 
Compliance to internal and external requirements 
Proactive system to monitor Internal Compliance (compliance with internal controls and 
polices) and External Compliance (compliance with external rules and regulations). It is 
consistent with Monitoring & Review and Communicate & Consult stage of I SO 31000 
Risk Management Process. 
 
10.0 STAFF TRAINING 
 
 Relevant staff must receive ongoing training in relation to the implementation and 
 maintenance of the risk management framework. This training consists of, but is not 
 restricted to training of: 
• Board and Senior Management on the overall concepts and framework 
• Risk Champions in the detailed operation of the framework and related systems 
• Employees in overall awareness and responsibilities 
 
11.0 ERM ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
11.1.1   The Board of Trustees is ultimately responsible for risk  
  management in the Fund. The BOT has delegated the  
  oversight role of risk management to the Audit & Risk   
  Committee. Risk Management is the responsibility of all staff 
  within their limits of accountability and responsibility in their  
  respective areas. 
 
11.1.2   The Heads of Departments, RM’s, BM’s & OIC’s shall be  
  accountable for the risk management in their respective areas 
  of functional responsibility. 
 
11.1.3   The Fund shall nominate Risk Champions at each business  
  unit le vel. The champions will be trained in risk management 
  and shall play a key role in facilitating and coordinating risk  
  management activities within their Departments/Regions/ 
  Branches & Sub-Branches. 
 
11.2 For ERM to be successful, parties in this framewo rk must play their roles 
effectively. The roles should be embedded within the existing organisation 
structures and reported through the existing communication channels. 
 
 
 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
23 
 Table 6 
Parties Roles & responsibilities 
 
The Board of 
Trustees 
(i) The BOT is responsible for oversight and shall, through 
the Board Audit Committee, ensure the maintenance of 
this framework. 
(ii)   Appraised on a timely basis of the Fund’s major risks 
through the Audit & Risk Committee or the Managing 
Trustee. 
(iii)  Review, concur with and approve the Fund’s risk 
management plans and major risk response strategies. 
(iv)  Obtain assurance from the Managing Trustee that the 
framework for the effective management of risk is in 
place.  
(v) The Board shall have the oversight responsibility to 
review adequacy and effectiveness of the overall 
arrangements put in place by management and annual 
Risk Register to ensure adequate controls and measures 
have been developed to mitigate risks. 
(vi) The BOT shall provide appropriate resources for risk 
management. 
Audit & Risk 
Committee 
(ARC) 
The Board of Trustees has delegated the oversight role over 
risk management to the Audit & Risk Committee. The role 
and responsibility of the Audit & Risk Committee regarding 
risk management is as specified in Annex 12.2 
Managing 
Trustee (MT) 
The MT has the ultimate accountability for managing the 
Fund’s risks.  
(i) The MT shall ensure that specific risk management 
accountabilities are established, properly documented 
and maintained by the Fund. 
(ii) The MT is responsible for ensuring that this framework is 
active in all departments/regions/branches within NSSF. 
(iii) The MT shall be responsible for the implementation of 
this framework and shall direct senior management 
under the guidance of the Manager, Risk to collate and 
assess risks from all departments. 
(iv) Establish appropriate whistle blowing programme in line 
with the Fund’s policies. 
(v) Receive and approve reports on risk management 
issues. DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
24 
Senior 
Management 
Team 
The Senior Management shall be responsible for delivery 
and maintenance of risk management systems within NSSF.  
 
Their role shall be: 
(i) Receiving and discussing quarterly risk management   
reports with the RM Department & Risk owners 
Assessing progress made against agreed action plans. 
(ii) Examine and analyse the Risk Register before it is 
presented to t he Board Audit  & Risk  Committee and 
ask critical questions of each risk owner.  
(iii) They shall also follow -up on action plans   
recommended by the Board and approve risk mitigating 
actions proposed by Risk Owners.  
(iv) The committee shall provide support of risk   
management activities in the Fund. 
(v) Arranging/providing risk management training as 
appropriate. 
Manager, Risk 
Management 
 
 
The Risk Management Department shall coordinate risk 
management activities throughout the Fund. It shall act as 
an organ which reviews the effectiveness of the Fund’s risk 
management efforts as well as emerging issues/concerns. 
  
The Risk Manager shall: 
(i) provide support to senior management on reporting and 
consolidation of risks; 
(ii) select, develop and maintain systems required to suppor t 
the risk assessment process for the various departments; 
(iii) Coordinate risk reporting throughout the Fund by 
consolidating quarterly & annual risk management 
reports to Senior Management & the Audit & Risk 
Committee. 
(iv) Monitor and report upon trends in the Fu nd’s risk profiles 
over time. 
 
Further, the Risk Manager shall: 
(i) be the custodian of appropriate risk methodologies and 
templates; 
(ii) monitor progress against action plans designed to 
manage operational risks; and 
(iii) Identify training needs on risk management acr oss the DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
25 
Fund. 
HOD’s/ RM’s/ 
BM’s/OIC’s 
 
 
(i) Each will ensure that a Risk Register is established and 
properly maintained by the D epartment/Regions/ 
branches. 
(ii) They will also ensure that risk responses are 
implemented to address risks that have been identified 
and classified as major. 
Risk Champions They shall be the main point of contact between their 
respective departments/regions/branches and the Risk 
Management Department. The detailed roles and 
responsibilities are defined in Annex 12.3 
Individual 
employees 
Individual employees are personally responsible for 
managing risks in their functional areas within the scope of 
their authority, responsibility and accountability. 
Risk Owners 
 
These are staff with the primarily responsibility for particular 
risks and controls.  
 
Each Risk Owner must ensure that the risks they are 
responsible for is adequately mitigated, monitored & timely 
reported to the RM  Department. Effective risk management 
will form part of performance contracts for all Risk Owners. 
Internal Audit 
Function 
 
The Internal Audit  Department shall independently appraise 
the Fund’s operations, assess the effectiveness of internal 
controls and help ensure conformance with the policies & 
procedures. They shall review the effectiveness of the risk 
management at the overall organisation level and at the 
individual business units during their audits. 
External 
Auditors 
 
In the course of the financial audits, they could provide 
information useful to management in carrying out its risk 
management-related responsibilities. 
External 
Contractors 
External contractual parties who act as agents for NSSF, 
such as outsourced service providers and partnering 
institutions, have an obligation to fulfil their contractual 
responsibilities including the safeguarding of NSSF  assets, 
where relevant. Staff members responsible for their 
supervision must ensure this is done 
 
 
 
 DEPARTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
TITLE OF DOCUMENT ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
DOCUMENT NUMBER SF/IAR/PD/03 
ISSUE NUMBER 02 
 
 
 
 
26 
13.0 ANNEXES 
13.1  -  TOR for the Audit & Risk Committee in relation to ERM 
13.2  -  Risk Management Champions - Roles and Responsibilities 
12.4  -  Information Security Risk Assessment and Treatment Process 
   
ANNEX 12.2: TOR FOR THE AUDIT & RISK COMMITTEE IN RELATION TO ERM 
 
The Board of Trustees has delegated its risks management responsibilities to the 
Audit & Risk Committee. The main purpose of the Committee is to assist the BOT in 
discharging its duties relating to identification of key risk areas, measurement and 
control of risk, and formulating risk management policies. The Committee is 
responsible for the quality, integrity and reliability of the Fund’s risk man agement 
program, on behalf of the Board of Trustees. The duties of the Committee are as 
follows:   
1) Set out the nature, role, responsibility and authority of the Risk Management 
Function, 
2) Ensure the independence of the Risk Management Function according to best 
practices, 
3) Define the Board’s risk appetite and risk management program for all key risks, 
subject to annual review, 
4) Monitor the risk strategy and policies recommended by management and ensure 
compliance with the risk tolerance, 
5) To receive and review quarterly risk reports on: 
• Level of risk 
• Significant risk exposures in the Fund 
• Results of risk control initiatives 
• Significant decisions by management. 
6) Ensure that strategic objectives and overall activities are commensurate to the 
Board risk tolerance levels, 
7) Review and assess the integrity of the risk control systems and ensure that risk 
policies and strategies are effectively managed, 
8) Introduce such measures as in the committee’s opinion may serve to enhance the 
adequacy and efficiency of the risk manag ement policies, procedures, practices 
and controls applied at the Fund. 
9) Ensure the resources for Risk management function is adequate in terms of 
appropriate infrastructure, including software and human resources.   
 
 
 
ANNEX 12.3 : 
RISK MANAGEMENT CHAMPIONS- ROLES AND   RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
1) Assisting the Manager - Internal audit & Risk to create a risk awareness culture 
within NSSF through: 
• Disseminating risk materials issued by the Manager, Internal audit and Risk e.g. 
circulating memos and emails from the Mana ger- Internal audit and risk, other risk 
literature, memos from the MT, brochures, posters, etc; 
• Follow up on actions spelt out in memos by the MT and the Manager Internal Audit 
and Risk e.g. documenting status of implementation of recommendations by branc h 
management and sending these to the manager internal audit and risk; 
• Holding and facilitating refresher risk workshops and trainings under the instruction 
of the Manager- Internal Audit & Risk. 
2) Act as a focal point of contact on risk issues for the conce rned 
branch/department. 
3) To facilitate the risk assessment exercise through dissemination of 
questionnaires to participants, collection of questionnaires from interviewed 
participants and coordinating the safe, secure and confidential transfer to the 
Manager, internal audit and risk. 
4) Timely escalation of risk issues from the departments/branches to the Manager, 
Internal Audit and Risk. 
5) Facilitating at department/branch level, the updating of the Risk Register on an 
annual basis. 
6) Coordinating at department/branch/Sub-Branches level risk responses proposed 
by the Risk Management Unit though follow  up with departmental/branch 
management on the progress of risk response initiatives and reporting these to 
the Manager- Internal Audit and Risk; 
7) Preparation of Quarterly reports on actions taken by process/risk owners at the 
departments/branches. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
ANNEX 12.4  
INFORMATION SECURITY RISK ASSESSMENT AND TREATMENT PROCESS 
 
i. The Risk Owner shall identify all the available processes within the 
department/branch/sub branc h and all the information within those processes 
should be subsequently highlighted. 
ii. Identify the information security risks (threats), classifying them as risks associated 
with loss of confidentiality, integrity and availability of information and determi ne 
their causes (vulnerabilities). 
iii. Analyze the information security risks using the likelihood and impact and determine 
the risk level as guided by the Risk Assessment Matrix  Annex 12.1  in the ERM 
Framework. 
iv. The Analysis is done factoring in the existing controls in place. 
v. Evaluate the information security risks level results as guided by the Risk 
Acceptance criteria (Ref Table 3) and prioritize the risk. 
vi. Select appropriate treatment options (Ref Tabl e 4) taking into account the risk 
assessment results. 
vii. Determine all additional controls that can address the  information security risk 
treatment option(s) chosen. 
viii. Compare the c ontrols determined in (vii) above with those in  Annex A and verify 
that no necessary controls have been omitted. 
ix. The Fund shall produce and communicate a Statement of applicability that contains 
the necessary controls in 7 & 8  justifying whether they are implemented or not and 
the justification for exclusions of controls from Annex A. 
x. Where the control determined in (vii) above is not in the Annex the said control to 
be referred to the risk officer for inclusion in the Statement of applicability (SOA) of 
the Fund. 
 
xi. Formulate a risk treatment plan indicating the actions to take in implementing 
controls, the resources required the time frame with the risk owner’s approval. 
   
 