www.pwc.com 
 
Gearing up to fortify 
KPLC to withstand 
disaster 
 
BCCM Framework  
 
 
Project title: 
Enterprise Risk 
Management Program 
for Kenya Power and 
Lighting Company 
Limited 
Strictly private  
and confidential 
26 September 2016 
  
  
 
PricewaterhouseCoopers Limited. PwC Tower, Waiyaki Way/Chiromo Road, Westlands  
P O Box 43963 – 00100 Nairobi, Kenya 
T: +254 (20)285 5000 F: +254 (20)285 5001    www.pwc.com/ke 
Directors: U Akpata*  T Almassy#  S Cheruiyot  A Eriksson  J Kabochi  M Karama  K Muchiru  M Mugasa  T Mukora  A 
Murage  F Muriu  S Mutinda P Ngahu  R Njoroge  S N Ochieng’  S Okello  B Okundi  K Saiti  R Shah  M Thoithi  M Wambugu  
E Kerich M Nyabanda (* Nigerian) (# Hungarian) 
Ms Beatrice Meso 
General Manager 
Corporate Affairs and Company Secretary 
Kenya Power and Lighting Company (KPLC) Limited 
P.O Box 30099 - 00100 
Nairobi 
Kenya 
 
26 September 2016 
Dear Beatrice  
Subject: Submission of Business Continuity & Crisis Management Framework  
It was a pleasure working with you and your team to offer consultancy services for the Enterprise 
Risk Management (ERM) program for Kenya Power and Lighting Company Limited ( hereafter 
referred as “Kenya Power”). 
In accordance with your instructions as confirmed in our contract dated 21 September 2015, 
PricewaterhouseCoopers Limited (herein referred as “PwC” or “we”) have designed a Business 
Continuity and Crisis Management (BCCM) framework, which we hereby submit as a formal 
deliverable of our engagement. 
You may not make copies of this report available to other persons except as described i n the contract. 
Where provision has been made copies are subject to the conditions described therein. We will not 
accept any duty of care (whether in contract, tort (including negligence or otherwise) to any person 
other than you, except under the arrangements described in our contract. 
Should you wish to discuss the report further, please do not hesitate to contact Sydney Ondari or 
myself. 
Yours faithfully 
 
 
Edward Kerich 
Director 
 
  Document Release Notice   
Kenya Power BCCM Framework        
PwC Strictly private and confidential 1 
Document Release Notice 
BCCM Framework 
Version 1.0 
Date of release: 26 September 2016 
Authors Date 
PricewaterhouseCoopers  26 September 2016 
 
 Reviewers Date 
Kenya Power and Lighting Company Limited  26 September 2016 
 
Revision History 
Release Issue Date Change Details Reviewed by  
Version 0.1 8 September 2016 Draft BCCM framework submitted for 
review of Kenya Power and Lighting 
Company Limited 
Risk and Integrity 
Department (Kenya Power 
and Lighting Company 
Limited) 
Version 1.0 26 September 
2016 
BCCM framework updated based on 
comments received from Kenya Power 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Glossary of Terms   
Kenya Power BCCM Framework   
PwC Strictly private and confidential 2 
Glossary of Terms 
Abbreviation Term  Definition 
A   
AfDB African 
Development Bank 
 
   
B   
BCCM Business 
continuity and 
crisis management 
 
BC Business 
Continuity 
The capability of the organisation to continue delivery of 
products or services at acceptable redefined levels following a 
disruptive incident 
BCM Business 
Continuity 
Management 
A holistic management process that identifies potential 
threats to an organisation and the impacts to business 
operations those threats, if realised, might cause, and which 
provides a framework for building organisational resilience 
with the capability of an effective response that safeguards 
the interests of its key stakeholders, reputation, brand and 
value-creating activities 
BCP business continuity 
plan 
A documented collection of procedures and information that 
is developed, compiled, and maintained in readiness for use 
in an incident to enable an organisation to continue to deliver 
its critical products and services at an acceptable predefined 
level 
BIA business impact 
analysis 
The process of analysing business functions and the effect 
that a business disruption might have upon them 
   
C   
 consequence Evaluated outcome of an event or a particular set of 
circumstances  
 confidentiality Preserving authorised restrictions on information access and 
disclosure, including means for protecting personal privacy 
and proprietary information 
 contingency plan Plan comprising alternative methods of continuing business 
operations in case of adverse situations 
 contingency 
planning 
Planning for the unexpected or the possibility of 
circumstances changing 
CRA Continuity 
Requirements 
Analysis 
The process to collect information on the resources required 
to resume and continue the business activities at a level 
required to support the organisation’s objectives and 
obligations 
 crisis A situation with a high level of uncertainty that disrupts the 
core activities and/or credibility of an organisation and 
requires urgent action 
CM Crisis Management A process designed to prevent or lessen the damage a crisis 
can inflict on an organisation and its stakeholders Glossary of Terms   
Kenya Power BCCM Framework   
PwC Strictly private and confidential 3 
Abbreviation Term  Definition 
CMT Crisis Management 
Team  
The heart of the corporate response to a disaster. It 
comprises of the Managing Director and Chief Executive 
Officer, all General Managers and all critical departmental 
managers of Kenya Power 
 critical A qualitative description used to emphasize the importance 
of a resource, process or function that must be available and 
operational either constantly or at the earliest possible time 
after an incident, emergency or disaster has occurred  
 critical activities Those activities which have to be performed to deliver the key 
products and services and which enable an organisation to 
meet the most important and time-sensitive objectives 
   
D   
DAT Damage 
Assessment Team 
The DAT is responsible for conducting an initial assessment 
of the emergency’s likely impact on Kenya Power operations 
and work together with EC and ERT in that respect 
 disaster A physical event which interrupts business processes 
sufficiently to threaten the viability of the organisation  
 disruption An event that interrupts normal business functions, 
operations, or processes, whether anticipated (e.g. hurricane, 
political unrest) or unanticipated (e.g. a blackout, terror 
attack, technology failure, or earthquake) 
 downtime A period in time when something is not in operation  
   
E   
EC Emergency 
Coordinator 
EC assumes overall leadership of all emergency/ major 
incident response activities. He is responsible to ensure that 
the coordination of all emergency response activities among 
the ERT, DAT and CMT  
ERM Enterprise Risk 
Management 
ERM’s mission is to identify, assess, monitor, and report 
major risks that could impede or otherwise negatively affect 
achievement of the organisation’s strategic goals and 
operational objectives 
ERT Emergency 
Response Team 
ERT’s mission is to prevent a serious loss of profits, public 
confidence or information assets by providing an immediate, 
effective and skilful response to any unexpected event 
 event Occurrence or change of a particular set of circumstances  
 extended outage A lengthy, unplanned disruption in system availability due to 
computer hardware or software problems or communication 
failures 
   
F   
FTL Finance Team 
Leader 
The FTL, when activated, will facilitate various 
administration and financial activities 
   
I   Glossary of Terms   
Kenya Power BCCM Framework   
PwC Strictly private and confidential 4 
Abbreviation Term  Definition 
 impact Evaluated consequence of a particular outcome 
 incident An event that has the capacity to lead to loss of or a 
disruption to an organisation’s operations, services, or 
functions – which, if not managed, can escalate into an 
emergency, crisis, or disaster  
 invocation Act of declaring that an organisation’s business continuity 
arrangements need to be put into effect in order to continue 
delivery of key products and services 
   
K   
Kenya Power Kenya Power and 
Lighting Company 
Limited 
 
   
L   
LO Liaison Officer The LO is responsible for all internal communications, 
assistance to the ERT and EC. The LO also provides post-
event report of activities 
LTL Logisitics Team 
Leader 
The LTL, when activated will organise and coordinate the 
provision of services and support to the ERT 
   
M   
MTD maximum 
tolerable 
disruption 
The duration after which an organisation’s viability will be 
irrevocably threatened if a product or service delivery cannot 
be resumed  
MTPD Maximum 
Tolerable Period 
of Disruption 
The time it would take for adverse impacts, which might arise 
as a result of not providing a product/ service or performing 
and activity, to become unacceptable. 
 mitigation Limitation of any negative consequence of a particular 
incident 
   
O   
OTL Operations Team 
Leader 
The OTL, when activated, will direct and coordinate all 
tactical operations associated with the business disruption 
event 
 outage A period in time when something is not in operation  
   
P   
PIO Public Information 
Officer 
Emergency Response Public Information Officer, when 
activated, is responsible for communication with any/all 
third parties and the dissemination of information to 
appropriate departments and individuals. The PIO also assist 
the EC as directed and provide post-event report of activities 
PLT Planning Team The PTL, when activated will prepare the Emergency Action Glossary of Terms   
Kenya Power BCCM Framework   
PwC Strictly private and confidential 5 
Abbreviation Term  Definition 
Leader Plan; will maintain situation and resource status, and 
coordinate the BCCM activities 
 process A set of interrelated or interacting activities which transforms 
inputs to outputs 
   
R   
RPO recovery point 
objective 
The target set for the status and availability of data 
(electronic and paper) at the start of a recovery process. It is a 
point in time at which data or capacity of a process is in a 
known, valid state and can safely be restored from  
RTO recovery time 
objective 
The target time for resuming the delivery of a product or 
service to an acceptable level following its disruption  
 redundancy The duplication of critical infrastructure support systems 
with the intention of backing up the primary systems and 
protecting against system down-time due to failure 
 resilience The ability of an organisation to resist being affected by an 
incident  
 risk The effect of uncertainty on objectives. Combination of the 
consequences of an event (including changes in 
circumstances) and the associated likelihood of occurrence 
 risk assessment Overall process of risk identification, risk analysis and risk 
evaluation. 
RM risk management Coordinated activities to direct and control an organisation 
with regard to risk 
   
S   
SO Safety Officer The SO when activated is responsible for monitoring and 
managing physical and staffs safety conditions. The SO also 
assist the EC as directed and provide post-event report of 
activities 
 stakeholder Individual or group having an interest in the performance or 
success of an organisation e.g. customers, partners, 
employees, shareholders, owners, the local community, first 
responders, government, and regulators  
   
T   
 threat A potential cause of an unwanted incident, which may result 
in harm to individuals, assets, a system or organisation, the 
environment, or the community  
   
V   
 vulnerability The degree to which a person, asset, process, information, 
infrastructure or other resources are exposed to the actions 
or effects of a risk, event or other occurrence  
   
 
 
Table of Contents 
Document Release Notice 1 
Glossary of Terms 2 
BCCM Policy 8 
BCCM Framework 13 
Appendix 1: Templates                                                               53 
Appendix 2: Building resilience in your people           85 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
BCCM Policy   BCCM Policy 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 8 
 
BCCM Policy 
Mission & Vision of Kenya Power 
The key mandate of Kenya Power is to plan for sufficient electricity generation and transmission capacity to meet 
demand; building and maintaining the power distribution and transmission network and retailing of electricity to 
its customers.  
Kenya Power aims to achieve a business continuity and crisis management (BCCM) capability that can keep up with 
the pace of change in the industry and introduce a clearly defined framework for the on-going BCCM capability 
across the organisation, such that Kenya Power can continue servicing its customers at an acceptacle level, even in 
the time of disruptive events. 
 
Purpose of the policy 
The Business Continuity and Crisis Management (BCCM) Policy (herein referred to as “Policy”) sets out a 
structured and consistent approach to make sure that the business continuity risks of Kenya Power and Lighting 
Company Limited (Kenya Power) are identified and reviewed, and that they are understood and appropriately 
managed. This entails creation of an environment in which the management of business continuity risks is effective 
and consistent across Kenya Power, in line with global standards and good practice, and enables management to 
make informed decisions whilst mitigating identified risks. 
The purpose of the BCCM Policy is to identify, monitor, understand and manage BCCM risks within Kenya Power. 
 
Objective of the policy 
The objective of this Policy is to clearly define, formalise, communicate and give direction to the way in which 
BCCM should be implemented and managed within Kenya Power.  Achievement of the objective of the Policy should 
result in: 
 Preparedness for catastrophic events; 
 Staff safety focus; 
 Minimising financial and operational impacts to Kenya Power in the event of a disaster; 
 Safeguarding facilities, business information and assets of Kenya Power; 
 Providing timely availability of all key resources necessary to operate the critical business processes at a level 
of operation that is acceptable to management; 
 Maintaining stakeholder contact and confidence; 
 Communicating BCCM documentation to all relevant parties; 
 Regular testing, review and subsequent updating of all BCCM documentation; 
 Establishing clear roles and responsibilities and delegations of authority;  
 Defining clear allocation for ownership of BCCM; 
 Applying consistent Management information reporting and escalation processes;  
 Embedding a BCCM risk awareness culture through on-going training; and 
 Providing BCCM reporting with independent assurance to the Board. BCCM Policy 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 9 
 
Scope of the policy 
The BCCM Policy is a Kenya Power-wide policy and covers the entire organisation (encompassing the Central Office 
and regions). 
 
Availability of policy 
The Policy is for internal use and distribution only. The Policy is available to appropriate levels of staff via the 
governance structures or risk management functions of Kenya Power.   BCCM Policy 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 10 
 
Policy Governance Structure 
The diagram below depicts the BCCM Governance Structure, along with detailed BCCM roles and responsibilities. 
 
 
Note: The CMT comprises of the following:  
 The Managing Director (MD) and Chief Executive Officer (CEO), acting as the CMT Leader, 
 An alternate to the CMT Leader (who may be appointed by the MD and CEO) and 
 All General Managers and critical Departmental Managers. 
BCCM Policy 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 11 
 
Policy review 
The Policy is subject to annual review. Any proposed interim changes must be approved by the Kenya Power Crisis 
Management Team (CMT). 
 
Ownership of the policy 
Ownership of this Policy is vested in the Business Continuity and Crisis Management Coordinator, who is 
responsible for coordinating the drafting and/ or updating of the Policy on a regular basis. 
 
Approval of the Policy 
The Policy is approved by the Board upon recommendation from the CMT. 
 
Actions for non-compliance 
The actions for non -compliance with this Policy will be governed by the governance structure of risk management. 
Instances of non -compliance will be reported to the appropriate level in the str ucture: Management Committee, 
Code of Ethics and Human Resources. 
The disciplinary rules and actions as set out under the Company’s Code of Ethics will apply to the Policy. 
In the event of a significant breach of the Policy, the transgression will be immed iately escalated to the CMT, 
followed by the Disciplinary Committee and finally the Board. Significant breaches of internal control systems will 
also be escalated to the Disciplinary Committee. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
BCCM Framework 
 BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 13 
 
BCCM Framework  
BCCM Framework 
The CMT will define and establish a BCCM Framework to guide the implementation of an effective and robust 
business continuity and crisis management (BCCM) programme aimed at ensuring the continuity of critical Kenya 
Power business operations in the event of a disaster or disruption to normal operations.  
The Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) model shall be applied for planning, establishing, implementing, operating, 
monitoring, reviewing, maintaining and continually improving the effectiveness of the BCCM  of Kenya Power. 
 
 
A brief overview of the PDCA model has been provided below.  
Component Description  
Plan          
(Establish) 
As part of this component, the BCCM policy, objectives, controls, processes and procedures 
relevant to improving business continuity and crisis management are established. This will 
help deliver results that are aligned with the overall policies and objectives of Kenya Power.  
Do            
(Implement 
and operate) 
This encompasses the implementation and operating of the business continuity and crisis 
management policy, controls, processes and procedures. 
Check  
(Monitor and 
review) 
This covers the monitoring and reviewing of performance against the BCCM policy and 
objectives, reporting the results to Kenya Power management/ board for review, and 
determining and authorising actions for mitigation and improvement.  
Act           
(Maintain and 
improve) 
Within this component, the BCCMS is maintained and improved through the implementation 
of mitigating/ correcting actions, based on the results of Kenya Power management/ board 
review and reappraising of the scope of the BCCM, the policy and objectives.  
BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 14 
 
1. Plan  
As part of this component, there is the need to clearly understand the context of the organisation.  
1.1 Context of the organisation 
1.1.1 Understanding of the organisation and its context 
The internal and external issues that affect the ability of Kenya Power to achieve the intended outcome(s) of its 
BCCMS should be determined. 
There is the need to identify and formally document the following:  
1. The key activities of Kenya Power, its operations, functions, partnerships, supply chains, relationships 
with different interested parties and the potential impact of a disruptive event; 
2. The links between the BCCM policy and the objectives of Kenya Power and other relevant policies of the 
organisation, including the ERM and 
3. The risk appetite of Kenya Power. 
Whilst establishing the context, there is the utmost need to: 
 Set forth the objectives of Kenya Power with relation to business continuity and crisis management,  
 List the internal and external factors that can hamper the business operations/ service delivery,  
 Set risk criteria whilst considering the risk appetite of Kenya Power and  
 Establish the purpose of the BCCMS in the organisation. 
 
1.1.2 Understanding the needs and expectations of interested parties 
The interested parties/ stakeholders that are relevant to the BCCMS of Kenya Power and their respective 
requirements should be identified. This includes but is not limited to their expectations from Kenya Power.  
Note: Some examples of interested parties would include the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum, the World 
Bank and African Development Bank (AfDB). 
Furthermore, there is the need to establish, implement and maintain a procedure for identifying the relevant legal 
and regulatory requirements which apply to Kenya Power, continuity of its operations/ distribution services.  
A register can be maintained for all identified legal, regulatory and other requirements to which Kenya Power 
should comply. 
Introduction or amendments of legal, regulatory or other requirements should be communicated to affected 
personnel within Kenya Power and other interested parties (where applicable). 
 
1.1.3 Determining the scope of the business continuity and crisis management system  
Normally, the steps listed in this section are to be performed by the BCCM Coordinator, with the involvement of 
the CMT. This involves deciding which divisions will be covered by the BCCMS.  
The default recommendation is to involve all divisions across Kenya Power to participate and contribute to the 
BCCM planning process. Nevertheless, Kenya Power management/ Board has a right to decide- if there is a valid 
reason to exclude some divisions from the BCCM exercise due to its low criticality, this is the right time to do so.  
When defining the scope, there is the need to formally document and e xplain exclusions (if any). 
  BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 15 
 
1.2 Leadership  
The top management and other relevant management roles throughout Kenya Power should demonstrate 
leadership, support and strong commitment with respect to the BCCMS.  
1.2.1 Leadership and commitment 
The main focus of this step is to obtain the support of Kenya Power management and commitment of resources to 
develop and maintain the BCCM programme in the organisation.  
The top management/ Board has an explicit role to demonstrate their commitment in the development and 
maintenance of the BCCM programme, by showing leadership in the executive of the BCCM programme.  
Note:  
The CMT would comprise of General Managers across the different divisions. The CMT lead er would most 
likely be the Managing Director (MD) and Chief Executive Officer (CEO) or a delegated alternate. 
The CMT may assign an executive sponsor in Kenya Power (e.g. General Manager , Network Management) 
the task of overseeing the implementation of the programme and development and testing of the cont inuity 
plans. 
Furthermore, every Manager should be formally assigned the responsibility for the implementation and 
management of BCCM within their area(s) of responsibility. 
 
1.2.2 Management commitment 
Kenya Power needs to demonstrate leadership and commitment with regards to the BCCM programme. This can 
be done by undertaking the following: 
1. Making sure that clear policies and objectives are established for business continuity and crisis 
management, and these are in line with the strategic direction of Kenya Po wer; 
2. Making sure that the requirements of the BCCM are incorporated into the business processes of the 
organisation; 
3. Making sure that resources needed to develop and maintain the BCCM programme are available;  
4. Clearly setting out the importance of effective BCCM and need to abide with BCCM requirements across 
Kenya Power; 
5. Making sure that the intended outcome(s) of the BCCM programme are achieved;  
6. Guiding and supporting Kenya Power personnel in contributing to the effectiveness of the BCCM 
programme; 
7. Putting initiatives in place to embed BCCM in the culture of Kenya Power;  
8. Encouraging continual improvement of BCCM programme. 
 
1.2.3 Policy 
Kenya Power management needs to establish a BCCM Policy and make sure that it is: 
 Maintained as documented information; 
 Communicated across Kenya Power; 
 Made available to interested parties (as required); 
 Reviewed for continued appropriateness at agreed intervals and when significant change(s) occur.  
 BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 16 
 
1.2.4 Organisational roles, responsibilities and authorities 
Kenya Power management needs to formally define, assign and communicate the responsibilities and authorities 
for relevant roles within the organisation. 
Responsibility and authority shall be defined for the following: 
 Making sure that the controls established as part of the BCCM programme are in line with 
internationally recognised standards and  
 Regularly reporting on the performance of the BCCM to Kenya Power management.  
Note: When assigning roles and responsibilities for the BCCM programme, there is the need to make sure 
that the individuals have the necessary competencies and skills. 
 
Some of the pre-requisite skills for the resources managing the BCCM programme of Kenya Power include but are 
not limited to: 
 Education: a bachelor degree in management of information systems, b usiness administration, risk 
management or related degree with certificates from a recognised BCM body;  
 Project/ programme management skills: track record of successful multi -discipline projects; 
 Analytical skills and good understanding of Kenya Power processes, risks and controls; 
 Planning skills to develop, implement and maintain plans; 
 Good command of English (both verbal and written); 
 Interpersonal skills with ability to effectively communicate and influence decision -making with Kenya 
Power management; 
 Training skills (for knowledge sharing and transfer to business representatives).  
Note: Kenya Power management can demonstrate its commitment to the establishment, implementation, 
operation, monitoring, review, maintenance and improvement of the BCCM progr amme by undertaking the 
following: 
 Establish a BCCM Policy; 
 Make sure the objectives and plans for BCCM are set out;  
 Formally defining and assigning roles, responsibilities and competencies for BCCM and  
 Delegating the responsibility of BCCM to one or more persons, with the adequate authority and 
competencies to lead the implementation and maintenance of the BCCM across Kenya Power.  
 
Furthermore, Kenya Power management can make sure that responsibilities and authorities for the 
implementation and maintenance of BCCM have been assigned and communicated by:  
1. Formally defining the criteria for accepting risks and the acceptable levels of risk (currently in progress 
through implementation of the ERM); 
2. Participating in exercising and testing (e.g. being part of crisis simulation exercise to rehearse plan(s) 
established); 
3. Making sure that internal audits of the BCCM are undertaken, 
4. Undertaking regular management reviews of the BCCM and 
5. Demonstrating commitment to continual improvement of the BCCM programme across Kenya Power. 
 BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 17 
 
1.3 Planning 
1.3.1 Actions to address risks and opportunities 
There is the need to identify the risks and opportunities to be addressed to make sure th at thee BCCM can achieve 
its outcome(s), prevent or mitigate negative effects and achieve continual i mprovement.  
Kenya Power needs to set down its plan to implement actions to address the above mentioned risks and 
opportunities, how to integrate these into the BCCM processes and evaluate the effectiveness of the actions.  
 
1.3.2 Business continuity objectives and plans to achieve them 
Kenya Power management needs to make sure the BCCM objectives are established and communicated in the 
organisation. 
The following needs to be considered when defining the BCCM objectives:  
 The BCCM objectives needs to be consistent with the BCCM policy, 
 The minimum level of service/ operations which is acceptable to Kenya Power to achieve its business 
objectives; 
 The BCCM objectives need to be measurable and  
 The BCCM objectives need to be maintained. 
Note: Kenya Power needs to retain documented information on the BCCM objectives. 
 
1.4 Support 
1.4.1 Resources 
The next step is to determine and provide resources for the establishment, implementation, maintenance and 
continual improvement of the BCCM programme across Kenya Power.  
Note: This can be done by devising a BCCM programme schedule, which lays out the different tasks needed 
to develop, implement, test and maintain the BCCM, the assigned responsibilities and the expected 
timeframes. This ‘roadmap’ would ease the navigation through the BCCM process and also serve as a means 
to monitor status of implementation. 
There may also be the need to prepare a resource requirements and budget required to support the BCCM 
programme. This would include but not be limited to: 
1. project management costs,  
2. estimated time and effort for Kenya Power team to attend interviews, workshops and exercises,  
3. professional fees for consultancy/ support (if any), 
4. office supplies costs, 
5. project administrative support costs. 
 
  BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 18 
 
1.4.2 Competence 
This step is about developing the competence specifications and recommending appropriate personnel across 
Kenya Power. 
Resources who are assigned BCCM related tasks at different levels within Kenya Power, need to have the 
appropriate level of competence for undertaking the assigned tasks. 
Competence can be achieved by primarily understanding the skills required for the role and then providing 
necessary opportunities for individuals to obtain the aforementioned skills. This can be achieved through training, 
mentoring, knowledge sharing, etc. Kenya Power can also consider the hiring or contracting of competent persons.  
We have provided below a sample competence inventory: 
Role Duties and 
responsibilities 
Technical and behavioural 
competency 
Key performance 
indicator 
Crisis Management 
Team Lead – 
Managing Director 
(MD) 
 
Pre-crisis 
• Make internal 
communication about 
any crisis activities 
• Provide guidance and 
strategic direction on 
all BCCM matters 
During Crisis 
• Declare a crisis 
following discussion 
with CMT members 
• Lead the CMT in 
strategic decision 
making during a crisis 
• Take final decisions on 
all matters regarding 
recovery decisions 
including investment 
and resourcing 
• Manage relationships 
with key stakeholders, 
especially Ministry of 
Energy and Petroleum 
Post crisis  
• Lead the CMT to 
approve post incident 
reports and approve 
expenditures out of the 
normal procurement 
procedures 
• Share disaster report 
with the Ministry of 
Energy and Petroleum 
• Quality assurance: 
Understands BCCM related 
best practice and suggests 
organisation wide 
improvements 
• Vision: Provides others with a 
clear vision and direction 
• Decision making: Looks 
business-wide to understand 
underlying problem causes 
and options for resolution 
before making strategic 
decisions in an emergency for 
the good of the larger Kenya 
Power and builds support for 
those decisions 
• Time management- Creates a 
sense of urgency in the team – 
but in a positive, energetic and 
enjoyable way 
• Interpersonal skills-Builds a 
culture of openness within 
CMT to encourage creativity, 
trust and sound business 
relationships that result in the 
achievement of BCCM 
objectives  
• Leadership: Must be a 
member of the Management 
Executive Committee 
-Leads others and acts as a 
role model for good behaviour 
• Organisation’s 
compliance to 
BCCM 
accountabilities 
highlighted in 
BCP 
• Number of crisis 
situations 
averted within 
agreed timelines 
 
 BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 19 
 
1.4.3 Awareness 
All Kenya Power personnel need to have an awareness of the BCCM progra mme and the role that they play in it. 
Awareness sessions should be undertaken to communicate: 
 the BCCM policy of Kenya Power; 
 the need for BCCM in the organisation; 
 the expectation/ contribution of each personnel to the effectiveness of the BCCM programme;  
 consequences of not supporting the BCCM programme or not complying  with the BCCM requirements; 
 the role of each personnel in the time of a crisis or disruptive event.  
A training programme should be developed. 
Note: Kenya Power can consider the dissemination of information through classroom -based trainings, 
presentations at management and divisional meetings or including BCCM subject matter in other internal 
trainings in the organisation. 
 
1.4.4 Communication 
There is the need to determine the internal and external communications relevant to the BCCM programme. This 
encompasses: 
 what is to be communicated,  
 when is it to be communicated and  
 to whom this is to be communicated. 
Note: The assistance of the Corporate Communications section can be sought for this exercise.  
 
 
  BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 20 
 
2. Do 
2.1 Operation 
2.1.1 Risk and Business Impact Analysis 
Key Tasks  Key deliverables 
• Preparation and set-up 
• Identify business activities 
• Assess business impact and determine priorities 
• Identify business continuity resource requirements 
• Business impact profile- prioritisation of business 
activities 
• Business continuity resource requirements 
 
As part of the structured risk assessment process put in place through the ERM program, the following 
information is already compiled namely: 
 key activities of the organisation,  
 assessment of key risks associated with the different business activities undertaken within the 13 
divisions and  
 the mitigating actions and/ or the risk treatment controls implemented.  
Risk treatment involves the identification of options to reduce the co nsequences and/ or likelihood of an 
unacceptable risk. Amongst all the options, BCCM is specifically a treatment for risks that could potentially 
interrupt business operations and cause unacceptable consequences to Kenya Power.  
The Business Impact Analysis (BIA) builds on this information and takes the analysis one step further to 
determine the timeframes within which core activities of Kenya Power must be resumed following a crisis/ 
disruptive event. These timeframes are then used to prioritise activities that are critical for business continuity 
purposes.  
The BIA involves identifying the critical business processes and related supporting resources within the divisions 
of Kenya Power and determining the potential impact of an outage or disruption in servic es. The process includes 
a comprehensive assessment of all business activities that are performed within the 13 division of Kenya Power, as 
well as an analysis of the supporting resources that are required to perform these activities.  
The BIA results will in turn be used to determine the alternatives and options for recovery of critical business 
processes and will serve as an input for preparing the BCP Strategy Matrix and subsequently the Business 
Continuity and Disaster Recovery plans. 
  BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 21 
 
Key steps to consider when conducting the BIA: 
 
Key methods, tools and techniques that can be employed to carry out the BIA for Kenya Power include:  
 Interviews, 
 Questionnaires and 
 Workshops. 
  
BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 22 
 
How to proceed to identify the critical processes 
- ** Understanding impacts of disruptions 
As part of the BIA exercise, there is the need to assess the impact and consequences over time of the unavailability 
of key resources and consequently the core activities of the different divisions of Kenya Power. This encompasses 
partial or whole, temporary or permanent unavailability of Kenya Power personnel, premises, organisational data, 
vital records, etc. which underpin the different services. 
Note:  
The impacts of service unavailability have been categorised under the following:  
 Financial Impact  
Financial Impact considers value at risk over time; the increased /fixed cost for trading functions 
(operational costs) as well as financial value of work lost for non-trading functions (loss of customers 
who then go to produce their own electricity). 
 Impact on clients 
Impact on clients covers the impact of Kenya Power service unavailability to external clients. A service 
outage may affect trust and confidence of clients, and consequently the reputation of Kenya Power.  
 Impact on stakeholders 
This encompasses the impact of disruption of Kenya Power activities to its key stakeholders (amongst 
the Government of Kenya, more specifically the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum), and the key 
development partners of Kenya Power- World Bank, AfDB, etc.). 
 Impact on employees 
This category covers likely impacts on employees (such staff and board of directors), e.g. on the staff 
morale, their wellbeing, their productivity integrity (bribery) and subsequently the overall performance 
of the organisation.  
 Legal and Regulatory Compliance 
Legal and Regulatory Compliance considers the impact of breaches of statutory duties or legal and 
regulatory norms which Kenya Power is subject to. This includes but is not limited to National Energy 
and Petroleum Policy and Energy Bill. 
 
 
  BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 23 
 
- ** Identifying the critical processes 
After the BIA meetings/ workshops, there is the need to assess the likely impacts that a disruption would have on 
Kenya Power. 
The following has been provided for guidance purposes: 
Rating Financial 
Impact 
Impact through 
Customers 
Impact on 
employees 
Impact on 
Stakeholders                
(Internal/external) 
Legal and 
Regulatory 
compliance 
High Yes 
(loss in 
transaction 
revenue) 
Global + national 
negative publicity 
+ Negative 
compliance 
behaviour 
Staff morale + 
Performance + 
Integrity 
Serious loss of 
confidence 
Breach of contracts + 
claims demanded by 
clients + major failure 
in regulatory 
compliance 
Medium No Nation-wide 
negative publicity 
Staff morale + 
Performance 
Moderate loss of 
confidence 
Failure in regulatory 
compliance 
Low No Local negative 
publicity 
(minimal) 
Staff morale Negligible loss of 
confidence 
(minimal) 
No legal 
repercussions/ 
Minimal 
 
The key output of this step is a list of the critical business activities. A consolidated business impact profile is to be 
prepared for Kenya Power. 
Note: It is very important that the consolidated business impact profile is presented and endorsed by Kenya 
Power management as this would serve as a basis upon which the BCCM strategies and plans would be 
developed. 
 
2.1.2 Defining continuity requirements 
There is the need to also define the minimum resource requirements for BCCM. This involves identifying broad 
strategies, key dependencies and resources (people, IT systems and networks, premises and facilities,  and data 
backup and offsite storage) needed to support the resumption of critical business activities within different 
timeframes. 
 
2.1.3 BCCM Strategy 
As part of the BIA exercise undertaken in the previous step, the following have been identified:  
 The list of critical business activities,  
 The timeframe within which these should be resumed following a crisis or disruptive event and  
 The minimum resources that need to be available to support the resumption of the critical activities 
over time. 
The abovementioned output is now to be used to define a set of response options to meet the requirements for 
BCCM in Kenya Power. 
  BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 24 
 
Note: 
- A risk might be acceptable without any further action being taken. Even if it is not acceptable to Kenya 
Power, the ability to do anything about some risks could be limited, or the cost of taking any action 
disproportionate to the potential benefit gained. 
- For some risks, the best response may be to transfer them. This might be done by conventional 
insurance or contractual arrangements, or it might be done by paying a third party to take the risk in 
another way. 
- Risks may be transferred in order to reduce the risk exposure of Kenya Power.  
- It is important to note that some risks are not (fully) transferable; in particular, it is genera lly not 
possible to transfer reputational risk, even if the delivery of a service is contracted out.  
- The purchase of insurance may form part of a risk treatment strategy and will provide some financial 
recompense for some losses. 
- In some cases, Kenya Power may consider to change, suspend or terminate the service, activity, function 
or process. This option can only be considered where there is no conflict with the objectives, statutory 
compliance and stakeholder expectation for Kenya Power. This approach is most likely to be considered 
where a service, activity, function or process has a limited lifespan.  
 
As part of this step, Kenya Power needs to consider strategic options for continuity of its critical activities.   
Determining business continuity and crisis management strategy enables a range of strategies to be evaluated. 
This allows an appropriate response to be chosen for each critical service, such that Kenya Power can continue to 
deliver those services at an acceptable level of operation and within an  acceptable timeframe during and following 
a disruption. 
The following will help Kenya Power opt for the most appropriate strategies:  
 The maximum tolerable period of disruption of the critical activities,  
 The costs associated with the implementation of the strategies,  
 The consequences of failure to act.  
Strategies may be required for the following core resources, namely:  
 People 
There is the need to identify appropriate strategies for maintaining core skills and knowledge. This analysis 
extends beyond Kenya Power employees to contractors and other stak eholders who possess specialist skills 
and knowledge.  
We have provided within the appendix of this document, some examples of how Kenya Power can build 
capacity in its identified critical functions. 
 Premises 
A strategy should be devised for reducing the impact of unavailability of normal worksite(s) of Kenya Power.   
For example, Kenya Power may consider alternate substations or alternate lines to reduce im pact of 
disruptions. 
 Technology  
Strategies related to technology will be highly dependent on its relationship to the critical activities.  
Kenya Power has already established a disaster recovery (DR) site. There is now the need to understand if the 
strategies established are adequate- whether the replication/ backup arrangements meet the requirements of 
the business and/ or the DR site would pick up if the main site (Stima Plaza data centre) were down.  BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 25 
 
 Information 
Strategies need to be devised to make sure that the different types of information (physical and electronic) 
needed for the operation of Kenya Power business activities, are protected and recoverable within set 
timeframes after a crisis/ a disruptive incident has hit. 
Kenya Power is reliant on information held within its systems, as well as physical documents.  
 Supplies 
Kenya Power needs to identify and maintain an inventory of core supplies that support its critical activities.  
This includes but is not limited to spare parts for interventions (netwo rk related), spare equipment (for IT), 
stationery for administrative purposes. 
 Stakeholders 
Kenya Power needs to consider the interests and expectations of its key stakeholders when determining and 
selecting BCCM strategies. These should contemplate relevant social and cultural considerations. 
Strategies should be devised to manage relationships with key stakeholders, development partners and 
contractors. Different groups may require particular considerations.  
A person or group of persons need to be identified and assigned the task of discharging responsibility for 
welfare issues after a crisis/ disruptive incident. 
Note: Kenya Power management needs to sign off the documented strategies to confirm suitability of the 
chosen continuity strategies to meet the objectives of the organisation within its risk appetite. 
 
2.1.4 Establish and implement business continuity procedures 
Developing and implementing a BCCM response results in the creation of a BCCM governance framework and a 
structure of crisis management, emergency/ incident management, and business recovery plans that detail the 
steps to be taken during and after a major incident/ emergency to maintain or restore operations. 
This serves as a reference for Kenya Power personnel to respond in a way that is c onsistent with the approved 
continuity strategies of Kenya Power in the event of a major disruption.  
Note: A plan document is not a complete, step-to-step manual as each and every incident that occurs is 
unique, with varying levels of threats and business impact to Kenya Power. 
The first step would be to identify and appoint divisional representatives to work on the continuity plans.  
Each division participating in the BCCM programme will have to develop some steps to perform in case of a 
disaster, attend BCCM drills and contribute in few other ways. 
These people will be the main contact points in the subsequent steps. There is the need to make sure that at least 
one person is assigned in each division at this stage. That person could be a General Manager, a Manager, his/ 
her deputy or a trusted subject matter expert of appropriate seniority level within the division.  
Now it is time to document the plans. These plans would assist Kenya Power to effectively manage a disruption 
and ultimately resume the critical business functions. 
  BCCM Framework 
 
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 26 
 
Note: Very often, one of the challenges experienced by organisations, is to identify the important and 
relevant risks amongst all that can possibly go wrong and result in business disruption. One of the 
techniques to overcome this challenge is the development and use of risk scenarios.  
Kenya Power can perform a scenario analysis of the identified risks and relev ant business impacts. A list of 
generic scenarios can be used to define a set of concrete and customised scenarios, applied to the situation 
of Kenya Power. 
Some areas of risks / disaster scenarios which could result in power outage and could be considered are as 
follows: 
 Terrorist attack/ sabotage at one of the prime sites of Kenya Power (e.g. National Control Centre)  
 Unavailability of substation at Juja due to fire 
 Fire in one of the main administrative offices (e.g. Stima Plaza- also hosting the main data centre) 
 Outage resulting from overhead/ underground cable system failure (e.g. electrochemical treeing) 
 Unavailability of critical functions (e.g. due to strike, pandemic outbreak) 
 Transformer(s) failure resulting in major outage 
 Tree contact (falling over conductors) and causing outage 
 Vandalism (theft of conductor wire, equipment, etc.) 
 Natural weather phenomena 
 
The Business Continuity Plans will comprise of three high level documents; the Emergency Response Plan (ERP), 
the Crisis Management Plan and Recovery Procedures.  
The Emergency Response Plan will be location specific (for Kenya Power- administrative office or substation); it 
will guide on how first time response to a particular incident is conducted. A common template will be provided 
and will be used across the board.  
The Crisis Management Plan will be in a central location where key people  (General Managers, along with the 
Managing Director of Kenya Power) are going to be sitting; though from the BIA, it could be determined if there 
is need to have another regional specific Crisis Management Plan that reports to the Central one at 
Headquarters.  
The Recovery Procedures will be developed at operational level (station specific) focused at business recovery.  
The IT DRP will cover recovery procedures for IT system recovery. These will be the alternative processes and 
procedures to be used in the event of a crisis and they shall be developed by the end users themselves with the 
guidance of the BCCM Coordinator.  
Note: Templates have been provided and attached as annexure of this document. These have been provided 
for guidance purposes only. Kenya Power would need to customise the templates after the BIA exercise and 
selection of appropriate recovery strategies. 
 
Refer to appendix 1.1 for templates (Business Continuity Plan Template)  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 27 
 
Business Continuity Management Stages 
There are three main stages over time of an incident, namely: 
 Initial response and disaster declaration, 
 Business continuity and 
 Resumption (back to normal). 
Stage I: Initial Response and Disaster Declaration 
This stage deals with the immediate response to a major business disruption, within minute s of its occurrence. This 
stage includes the following broad activities: 
i. Initial Response and Notification of a potential disaster 
ii. Damage Assessment and Escalation 
iii. Disaster Declaration and Communication to relevant stakeholders 
Details of activities to be undertaken for initial response and disaster declaration at Kenya Power have been 
catered for in the Emergency Response Plan (ERP). 
Possible emergency situations include any event that may inhibit the ability of Kenya Power to perform work as 
usual, including, but not limited to: 
 Natural risks (such as Earthquake, Fire, Flood, Hurricane) 
 Environmental risks (such as Power interruption, Communications interruptions, Explosion/Fire, Aircraft 
crashes, Contamination) 
 Incited risks (Bomb Threats, Sabotage, Vandalism, Riots) 
Stage 2: Business Continuity 
Different divisions of Kenya Power will need to follow their recovery procedures within minutes of being informed 
of the disaster. 
Mobilisation of required teams and resources to the alternate site will be done as part of this stage. In case the 
primary resource identified for each activity is unavailable, the secondary personnel identified will be responsible 
for carrying out the activity. This stage will also cover salvage operations at the primary site in  order to recover any 
critical IT and non‐IT resources.  
This stage includes the following broad activities: 
i. Invocation of process recovery procedures 
ii.  Mobilization of resources 
iii.  Emergency control centre activities 
iv.  Salvage operations at the primary site 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 28 
 
Stage 3: Resumption Back to Normal 
This stage deals with the efforts to return to the normal mode of operation at the primary location for each unit. 
The objective is to return the business environment and operations to pre ‐disaster conditions. Depending on the 
damage caused by the incident, this can go on for days to weeks to months.  
This stage includes the following broad activities: 
i. Inspection and assessment of the primary site 
ii. Make long term recovery plans to rent new offices in case the primary site cannot be recovered from the 
disaster 
iii. Repairs at the primary site 
iv. Relocation to primary site 
 
The BCP process flow below identifies the recovery actions that are required in the situation of a disaster and shows 
where and how the different plans in this BCP document get invoked to enable a timely recovery of the critical 
business processes. The different teams identified in the BCP have a key role to play at both pre -crisis and post-
crisis stages to make this BCP effective.  
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 29 
 
 
BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 30 
 
Business Continuity & Crisis Management Structure 
This section lists the different roles and responsibilities of each team within the business continuity and crisis management structure of Kenya 
Power. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 31 
 
Crisis Management Team 
Description of the role: The Crisis Management Team (CMT) will decide on the course of actions to be 
taken based on the report from the Business Continuity & Crisis Management 
Coordinator. 
The responsibilities of the 
Crisis Management Team 
include but are not 
limited to: 
 Maintain contact with the BCCM Coordinator and members of the 
Emergency Response Team, Damage Assessment Team and Recovery 
Teams (Regional and Divisional) 
 Respond to requests for information 
 Inform of changes in strategy 
 Periodically receive reports from the various teams against target time 
scales 
 Check recovery progress against critical timeframes 
 Make decision in problem areas and exceptions 
 Schedule of subsequent actions 
 Assess the crisis situation and respond accordingly 
 Plan on what decisions need to be taken under the given circumstances 
and take the decision to invoke the BCP if found necessary 
 Direct the necessary teams on the actions to be performed 
 Coordinate and manage the relationship with the media 
 Handle legal issues 
 Approve and authorise extra expenses and extraordinary investments 
 Steer relationship with public authorities 
 Authorise the occupancy of the DR site and any other alternative recovery 
site and resumption back to original site 
 Conduct regular CMT briefings on progress and strategy 
 
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 32 
 
Crisis Management Leader 
Description of the role: The Crisis Management Leader is the Chairman of the Crisis Management 
Team. 
The responsibilities of the 
Crisis Management 
Leader include but are 
not limited to: 
 Lead the crisis management team at all times during a disaster. 
 Take final decisions on all matters regarding recovery decisions including 
investment and resourcing.  
 
 
Business Continuity & Crisis Management Coordinator 
Description of the role: The Business Continuity & Crisis Management Coordinator will be the point of 
contact to address any incident that can potentially turn into a crisis/disaster.  
Business Continuity & Crisis Management Coordinator will be a member of the 
Crisis Management Team.  
The responsibilities of the 
Business Continuity & 
Crisis Management 
Coordinator include but 
are not limited to: 
 Co‐ordinate with the Emergency Resp0nse Team and Recovery Team s for 
emergency response and business recovery respectively 
 Take strategic decisions along with the CMT based on the findings of the 
Damage Assessment Team/ Emergency Response Team and the impact on 
business operations of Kenya Power 
 Administer and ensure constant monitoring of all teams during a disaster  
 Record any emergency/ major incident reported in an incident log 
 Business Continuity & Crisis Management Coordinator in coordination 
with the Damage Assessment Team/ Emergency Response Team will 
coordinate initial rapid assessment of the situation in order to determine:  
 Kenya Power employees status 
 State of networks 
 Impact to operational capability 
 Asset/ premises status 
 Requirement to declare a disaster 
 Activation of Response / Recovery procedures 
 Conduct a Root Cause Analysis for all incidents and submit the 
incident report to the Crisis Management Team 
 Formal closure of an incident  
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 33 
 
Divisional/ Regional Recovery Team 
Description of the role: The role of the Recovery Team is to provide assistance for resumption of 
normal business functions at Kenya Power. 
The responsibilities of the 
Divisional/ Regional 
Recovery Team include 
but are not limited to: 
 Receive instruction from the Business Continuity & Crisis Management 
Coordinator that the BCP has been invoked 
 Ensure the respective processes can recover efficiently during the disaster, 
both at the alternate site (if any) as well as during normalisation (when the 
processes have to be resumed at the Kenya Power primary site) 
 Ensure the required resources are available on time and deployed 
effectively during disaster 
 Ensure that the critical business processes are up and running at the 
earliest at the recovery sites 
 Coordinate with the Emergency Response Team/ Damage Assessment 
Team to produce post incident report for all outages and forward such 
reports to the Business Continuity & Crisis Management Coordinator for 
finalisation. 
  
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 34 
 
Crisis Communication Plan 
The objective of the crisis communication plan is to effectively and efficiently manage communications during a 
crisis through a formal and clearly defined channel of communication to the employees and the various 
stakeholders.  
Communication of Disaster to Media 
The designated communication spokesperson of Kenya Power (e.g. Corporate Communications) will speak to the 
media in the event that a disaster is declared and Kenya Power is unlikely to restore any of its business operations. 
The plan to manage media relations is as follows: 
A. If the situation warrants (CMT decision), issue a public notice by means of an advertisement and issue a Press 
Release. The standard format of the advertisement would be as under: 
 The advert would be issued in the name of the person making the statement. 
 Corporate Logo of Kenya Power. 
 A brief description of the event and the damage caused. 
 The operations that have been hampered and alternative if any made for such operation. 
 Contact address and phone/ fax of alternative site operation. 
B. At the discretion of the Managing Director or a person deputed by the Managing Director, select press 
briefings may be held.  
If it is immediately known that Kenya Power employee(s) have been injured, this should be included in the 
preliminary announcement to the media. This announcement shall have a statement that, "The exact extent of the 
injuries and the names of the employees injured are unknown at this time."  
Any announcement to the media should also contain the name and telephone number of a contact who is available 
to answer any questions that media/ public may have.  
A sample format for preliminary notification of Disaster to the media has been provided in the appendix of this 
document.  
A helpline can be set up for employee and stakeholder communication. The Corporate Communications section will 
handle the calls.  
Communication to Employees 
Based on the detailed assessment of the DAT/ ERT and the estimated ti me required to recover from the disaster, 
the CMT will make a preliminary announcement to communicate the event to Kenya Power employees. 
The media to be used for the announcement will depend on the intensity of the disaster and also the available 
means for communication. The following means of communication could be used:  
1. Phone 
2. Email 
Refer to appendix 1.2 for sample formats for preliminary notification of disaster. 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 35 
 
Emergency Response Plan 
Purpose and scope 
The emergency response plan establishes the recommended organisation, actions and procedures needed to: 
 Recognise and respond to an incident;  
 Assess the situation quickly and effectively;  
 Notify the appropriate individuals and organisations about the incident;  
 Organise the company’s response activities, including activating Crisis Management Team;  
 Escalate the company’s response efforts based on the severity of the incident and  
 Support the business recovery efforts being made in the aftermath of the incident.  
Roles and responsibilities 
Emergency Response Team (“ERT”)  
An ERT should be established to provide a quick, effective and orderly response to incidents which are reported. 
The ERT’s mission is to prevent a serious loss of profits, public confidence or information assets by providing an 
immediate, effective and skilful response to any unexpected event.  
The ERT is authorised to take appropriate steps deemed necessary to mitigate or resolve an emergency/ major 
incident. The team is responsible for investigating suspected security incidents in a timely, cost -effective manner 
and reporting findings to the Emergency Coordinator and/or management and the appropriate authorities as 
necessary.  
In addition, the ERT assists in communication exercises, reporting and support to the Emergency Coordinator and 
members of the Crisis Management Team. 
Emergency Coordinator (“EC”) 
The EC assumes overall leadership of all emergency/ major incident response activities. He is responsible to ensure 
that the coordination of all emergency response activities among the ERT, Damage Assessment Team (“DAT”), 
Crisis Management Team (“CMT”).  
Refer to the following appendices for sample checklist highlighting sequence of activities to the f ollowed: 
 appendix 1.4 for the Initial Emergency Response Checklist  
 appendix 1.5 for the Emergency Response Team Task Checklist, 
 appendix 1.6 for the Emergency Response Team Meeting Checklist, 
 appendix 1.7 for the Emergency Coordinator Task Checklist, 
 appendix  1.8 for the Emergency Response Recommendations and 
 appendix 1.9 for the Actions Following a Disaster Declaration  
for other tasks that the Emergency Coordinator needs to follow in the event of a major business disruption at 
the Kenya Power office.  
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 36 
 
Emergency Response Public Information Officer (“PIO”) 
The PIO, when activated, is responsible for communication with any/all third parties and the dissemination of 
information to appropriate departments and individuals. The PIO also assist the EC as directed and provide post-
event report of activities. 
Refer to appendix 1.10 for the Public Information Officer Task Checklist for other tasks that the PIO needs follow in 
the event of major business disruption at the Kenya Power office. 
Liaison Officer (“LO”) 
The LO is responsible for all internal communications, assistance to the ERT and EC. The LO also provides post-
event report of activities. 
Refer to appendix 1.11 for the Liaison Officer Task Checklist for other tasks that the Liaison Officer needs  follow in 
the event of a major business disruption at the Kenya Power office. 
Safety Officer (“SO”) 
The SO when activated is responsible for monitoring and managing physical and staffs safety conditions. The SO 
also assist the EC as directed and provide post-event report of activities. 
Refer to appendic 1.12 for the Safety Officer Task Checklist for other tasks that the SO need follow in the event of 
major business disruption at Kenya Power. 
Damage Assessment Team (“DAT”) 
The DAT is responsible for conducting an initial assessment of the emergency’s likely impact on Kenya Power 
operations and work together with EC and ERT in that respect. The DAT assembles, investigates the incident using 
the DAT checklist.  
Planning Team Leader (“PTL”) 
The PTL, when activated will prepare the Emergency Action Plan; will maintain situation and resource status, and 
coordinate the BCCM activities. 
Refer to appendix 1.13 for the Planning Team Leader Task Checklist for other tasks that the PTL n eeds follow in the 
event of major business disruption at Kenya Power. 
Logistics Team Leader (“LTL”) 
The LTL, when activated will organise and coordinate the provision of services and support to the ERT.  
Refer to appendix 1.14 for the Logistic Team Leader Task Checklist for other tasks that the Logistic Team Leader 
needs follow in the event of major business disruption at Kenya Power. 
Operations Team Leader (“OTL”) 
The OTL, when activated will direct and coordinate all tactical operations associated with th e business disruption 
event. 
Refer to appendix 1.15 for the Operations Team Leader Task Checklist for other tasks that the OTL needs follow in 
the event of major business disruption at Kenya Power. 
Finance Team Leader (“FTL”) 
The FTL, when activated will facilitate various administration and financial activities.  
Refer to appendix 1.16 for the Finance Team Leader Task Checklist for other tasks that the FTL needs follow in the 
event of major business disruption at Kenya Power. BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 37 
 
Plan invocation 
A few examples of scenarios which would trigger the invocation of the ERP are as follows:  
Potential Risks Scenarios 
Unavailability of key personnel 
(e.g. Managing Director, GM, 
specialised engineers and other 
key staff) 
 Key personnel  have been kidnapped or is a victim of a riot 
 Contamination in an area or building 
Unavailability of key/ important 
suppliers 
 1 or more key suppliers have been affected by a bomb attack or riot or 
natural catastrophe when their intervention is required 
Information loss  The National Control Centre is unavailable, resulting in outage 
 The data centre and/or other critical premise of Kenya Power suffers 
from power outage and/or failure in IT equipment including 
telecommunications line and/ or failure of networks 
 The data centre suffers from natural catastrophe (such as fire) or 
incident (such as vandalism) and the DR site is unable to resume 
services  
Unavailability of premise (incl. 
intentional or unintentional 
acts) 
 A critical premise of Kenya Power is unavailable or partially available 
due to natural catastrophe, a fire a bomb attack or bomb attack alert 
 Particular substation is unavailable, resulting in outage in one or more 
areas 
Immediate Actions 
1. The first person to observe the business disruption event or to be informed of any of the above scenarios 
should immediately notify the EC or his/ her alternate and the DAT. 
2. In the event that the EC and his/ her alternate are not available, the incident should be reported to any 
other member of the ERT. 
3. The DAT will then assemble and investigate the event using the DAT checklist and will determine if the ERT 
needs to be activated. 
4. Refer to initial emergency response checklist for other tasks which need to b e followed in the event of major 
business disruption at Kenya Power. 
 
Document owner and maintainer 
The Emergency Coordinator is the primary owner of the plan and is responsible for reviewing, amending and 
updating the plan at regular intervals (as and when the Emergency Coordinator comes across new information that 
impacts on the Emergency Response Plan and on an annual basis). Any change to the document should be 
approved by the CMT. 
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 38 
 
Task and action lists 
The Emergency Response Plan includes the task lists and action checklists to manage the immediate consequences 
of a business disruption. These tasks: 
 ensure that safety of individuals is addressed first; 
 are based upon the results of the organisation’s BIA; 
 are structured in a way that delivers the strategic and tactical options chosen by the organisation; and 
 help prevent the further loss or unavailability of critical activities, and supporting resources  
The task checklists attached in appendix are to be followed in the event of major business disruption at Kenya 
Power. Follow the recommended sequence of actions below during the initial minutes after the occurrence of the 
event.  
 
Standing Down from Invocation 
The following actions need to be considered if the plan is NOT to be invoked:  
 Notify all members of the CMT of stand down. 
 Notify other employees as appropriate. 
 Notify the ERT members to restore suspended facilities and services.  
 DAT/ ERT must submit a report to the CMT for review. 
Refer to appendix for Emergency Response Team task clecklist . 
 
ERT meeting  
The ERT meeting is done on a regular basis until the incident has been resolved.  
Refer to appendix for ERT meeting checklist. 
 
Emergency Coordinator  
After completing the Initial Incident Response Checklist, the EC should undertake the sequenc e of tasks as 
indicated by the Emergency Coordinator Task Checklist indicated in the appendix.  
 
Command Centre task checklist 
Assuming the Crisis Management Team is activated by the EC, recommended sequences of actions should be 
facilitated by individuals assigned to the specific positions. 
Refer to appendix for the following: 
 Public Information Officer Task Checklist 
 Safety Officer Task Checklsit 
 Liaison Officer Task Checklist 
 Planning Team Leader Task Checklist BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 39 
 
 Logistics Team Leader Task Checklsit 
 Operations Team Leader Task Checklist 
 Finance Team Leader Task Checklist 
 
Emergency contacts 
The LO/PIO/EC will act as the spokesperson(s) of Kenya Power. The most effective means of communication will 
be identified in the light of the situation and depending on the recipient of the information, for instance, verbal, 
meetings, email, text message, telephone, mobile phone.  
The LO/PIO/EC will be responsible for emergency/key contacts communication. 
Managers will be responsible for communication to their respective s taffs/relatives/friends using the employee 
calling list appended to this plan.  
  
Media response 
Depending on the situation identified, communication with the media will be made. The PIO will assist with the 
release of information to the media in a formal press release. This information will not be released until approved 
by CMT. 
 
Stakeholder management 
Other key stakeholders identified are Suppliers and Customers. The organisation will communicate with them on a 
case by case basis. 
 
Incident management location 
The location from which the incident will be managed will depend on the incident and its severity. The main 
location is the Command Centre with details provided in the appendix.  
 
Annexes 
Up-to-date contact and mobilization details for any relevant agencies, organisations and resources that might be 
required to support the organisation’s response strategies, logs or forms for the recording of vital information about 
the incident, such as the incident timeline, details of casualties, decisions made, m oney spent, details of casualties, 
damage assessments, communications issued, and all other information deemed essential by the organi sation to 
support post incident review.  
Refer to appendix 1.17 for annexure templates for the ERP. 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 40 
 
Recovery Teams Procedures 
 
 BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 41 
 
Recovery Teams Procedures 
The Recovery Procedures deal with the continuity of critical processes following the declaration of a disaster and 
resumption– back to normal. 
Objective:  The objective of the recovery procedures is to provide 
a framework within which Kenya Power shall resume 
its critical processes in the event a disaster is declared. 
Plan owner and responsibility:  The owner of the recovery procedures is the Crisis 
Management Leader. 
The Business Continuity & Crisis Management 
Coordinator will be responsible for reviewing, 
amending and updating the plan. 
Background: The recovery procedures apply to the following 
divisions: 
 Critical divisions identified in BIA to be listed… 
 Critical regions identified in BIA… 
The recovery procedures has been suggested after a 
complete understanding of the organisation’s business 
priorities and risks and determining appropriate 
business continuity strategies. 
 
Mobilisation of Resources 
Once a disaster is declared and the Recovery Teams Procedures is invoked, the Recovery/Resumption Team will 
make logistic arrangements and mobilise other Recovery/Resumption Team to the affected and/ or respective DR 
site. 
Critical processes will activate their respective Recovery/Resumption plans and resume work at their respective DR 
site. 
Invocation of Recovery Teams Procedures 
The process recovery teams will invoke their respective recovery plans.  
These plans contain the following sections: 
i. Introduction: This section defines the purpose and scope of the plan.  
ii. Plan owner: This section refers to the owner of the plan and his/her responsibility towards the plan.  
iii. Recovery Time Objective (RTO) Requirements: This section lists the RTO requirements of the critical 
process of the respective business unit. 
iv. Activity/Tasks List: This section provides the details of tasks that will be required to resume the critical 
processes. 
v. Communication with stakeholders: This section lists the names of all stakeholders who will need to be 
contacted and who will contact in case of disaster declaration. BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 42 
 
vi. Resource requirements: This section lists the resources, forms, records/documents etc. required to 
recover/ resume the process 
vii. Contact Details: This section lists the contact details of employees, stakeholders and suppliers for the 
respective process.  
Listed below are the recovery procedures for critical divisions/ regions:   
Sr. No Process Recovery Plans 
1  
2  
3  
 
Resumption‐Back‐to‐Normal 
While the critical processes resume operations from the affected sites and/ or different DR sites, efforts to bring the 
operations back to normal at the primary site of Kenya Power will be made. This will include damage assessment, 
salvaging and the replacement and relocation to the primary site.  
Inspection and Assessment of the Primary Site 
Activities to be followed in this phase have been included in the appendix. Refer to appendix 1.18 for Resumption-
Back-to-Normal checklist. 
 
Repairs at the primary site 
The activities to be undertaken as repairs are done at the primary site have been included in the appendix. Refer to 
Repairs at the primary site checklist. 
 
Relocation to the Primary Site 
Refer to appendix 1.19 for the relocation to primary site checklist highlighting the activities to be undertaken during 
the relocation of Kenya Power operations from the different DR sites to the primary sites.  
Details of sections to be included as annexure of the Recovery Teams Procedures document, have been included in 
the appendix 1.20. 
 
 
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 43 
 
IT Disaster Recovery Plan 
Kenya Power business functions are dependent on information technology services including networks, systems and 
applications for daily business operations. The inability of information technology services to function would immediately 
impact the operations at Kenya Power and subsequently, resulting in significant work backlog.  
There is the need for the development of an IT Disaster Recovery Plan (IT DRP) to guide the efficient recovery of 
information systems supporting Kenya Power. The aforementioned document should outline the background, 
procedures, and contact information to recover critical networks, systems and applications.  
Proper execution of the DRP will help facilitate the timely recovery of key information systems, minimising business 
disruption. The DRP is an imperative component to the successful resumption of business functions at Kenya Power. This 
document also takes into consideration the broader perspective of business continuity, incorporating the elements from 
Kenya Power Business Impact Analysis (BIA). 
Note: The DRP is not intended as the definitive course of action. The IT Department may need to modify the plans and 
identify other action steps or solutions, to respond to, and recover from, a specific situation or account for unknown 
variables not addressed within this document.  
The DRP is designed to assist in minimising the effect of a disaster event, by ensuring the restoration of essential 
processing within the recovery time objectives (RTOs) established by the BIA.    BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 44 
 
Policy Statement 
Xxxxxxxxxxxx 
 
Objective 
The principal objective of the disaster recovery program is to develop, test and document a well -structured and 
easily understood plan which will help the organisation recover as quickly and effectively as possible from an 
unforeseen incident or emergency which interrupts information systems and business operations.  
 
Assumptions 
In order for the plan to be effective, these recovery procedures will rely on the following critical assumptions though 
this list is not conclusive.   
 Effective Backup & Restore Procedures 
 Functional, regularly updated & tested Disaster Recovery Plan  and Disaster Recovery Site 
 Procedures are sufficiently detailed for someone else to follow other than the person primarily responsible 
for the work. 
 Staff are available to perform critical functions defined within the disaster recovery plan.  
 Staff can be notified and can report to the Disaster Recovery site to perform critical processing, recovery 
and reconstruction activities. 
 Availability of redundant hardware 
 Effective SLAs are in place and regularly reviewed 
 An incident may require Kenya Power staff to function with limited automated support and some 
degradation of service, until full recovery is made. 
 
Plan Updating 
It is necessary for the IT DRP updating process to be properly structured and controlled.  Whenever changes are 
made to the plan they are to be fully tested and appropriate amendments should be made to the training materials. 
This will involve the use of formalized change control procedures under the control of th e xxxxx (DR Project 
Sponsor) and the plan will be updated by the xxxxxxxx.  
 
Plan Documentation Storage 
Soft copies of this Plan (CDs, USB flash and hard drives) and hard copies will be stored in secure locations to be 
defined by the organisation.  (It is recommended that relevant persons who should have access to the plan be 
identified and issued with the confidential copy of the plan for secure storage, preferably onsite and offsite). A 
master protected copy will be stored on specific resources establishe d for this purpose. 
 BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 45 
 
Primary Data Centre Layout & Infrastructure  
Diagram 1: Primary Data Centre Layout  
Diagram 2: Primary Data Centre Infrastructure 
 
Disaster Recovery Design Overview   
Diagram 3: DR Centre Layout 
Diagram 4: DR Centre Network Layout 
Diagram 5: DC to DR overview including WAN connectivity 
 
Backup Strategy 
 (Note: The strategy chosen is at the discretion of the Kenya Power organisation based on assessed risks and 
priorities).  
 
Offsite data storage  
Location xxxxxxx 
Contact Person at location: xxxxx 
Telephone contacts: xxxxxxxxxxx 
 
 
Alert, escalation and plan invocation 
Plan Triggering Events: 
Key trigger issues at headquarters that would lead to activation of the DRP are:  
1. Total loss of primary data centre/servers 
2. Total loss of power for an extended period of time and subsequent failure of the power backup solution to work  
3. An act of terrorism at the Kenya Power Stima Plaza premises or surrounding areas 
4. Loss of access to the office building 
 
Emergency Alert 
When an incident occurs the Crisis Management Team (CMT) must be activated. The CMT will then decide the 
extent to which the DR Plan must be invoked.  The CMT will consist of senior representatives from the main 
business departments. The CMT Leader will be a senior member of the organisa tion's management team, and will 
be responsible for taking overall charge of the process and ensuring that the organisation returns to normal 
working operations as early as possible 
 BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 46 
 
The Crisis Management Team (CMT) is responsible for activating the DR Pla n for incidents identified in this plan, 
as well as in the event of any other occurrence that affects the organisation’s capability to perform normally.   
 
The person discovering the incident calls a member of the CMT in the order listed:  
• xxx 
• xxx 
 
If not available try: 
• xxxx 
• xxxx 
 
Disaster Recovery Team 
One of the tasks during the early stages of the emergency is to notify the Disaster Recovery Team (DRT) that an 
emergency has occurred. The notification will request DRT members to assemble at an agreed location and will 
involve sufficient information to have this request effectively communicated.  
The Disaster Recovery team will assist in the entire disaster recovery operations. The team will co mprise of core 
members from IT Division of Kenya Power with representation from the top management. The team will be 
contacted and assembled by the CMT in the event of an incident.  
 
Responsibility of the Disaster Recovery Team 
1. Establish facilities for an emergency level of service within xx business hours;  
2. Restore key services within xx business hours of the incident; 
3. Recover to business as usual within xx to xx hours after the incident;  
4. Coordinate activities with first responders, etc.  
5. Report/Feedback to CMT. 
6. Stand down recovery activities upon return to “business as usual environment” at the primary site  
 
Damage Assessment 
This is a key activity in a disaster recovery plan and should start soon after the incident has occurred to provide an 
initial view of the situation; what has actually happened; what assets (e.g., buildings, people, IT systems) are 
affected and which of them has been damaged as well as an evaluation of the possibility for the situation to 
continue and possibly escalate. 
Information gathered is then used by the Crisis Management Team to determine the likely next steps in the 
incident, such as Building evacuation, Power Shut down Systems Shutdown or even the invocation of the Disaster 
Recovery Plan. 
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 47 
 
DRP Exercising 
Disaster recovery plan exercises are an essential part of the plan development process. In a DRP exercise, no one 
passes or fails; everyone who participates learns from exercises – what needs to be improved, and how the 
improvements can be implemented.  Plan exercising ensures that emergency teams are familiar with their 
assignments and, more importantly, are confident in their capabilities.  
Successful DR plans launch into action smoothly and effectively when they are needed. This will only happen if 
everyone with a role to play in the plan has rehearsed the role one or more times.  The plan should also be validated 
by simulating the circumstances within which it has to work and seeing what happens.  
 
 
Sections to be included as annexure to the IT DRP has been included in the Appendix 1.21.  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 48 
 
1.2 Exercising and testing 
Exercising is essential to understanding roles, developing teamwork, competence, confidence and knowledge which 
are vital at the time of a disruption. There is therefore the need for regular exercising and testing.  
The following types of testing can be considered:  
• Desk Check: Review and challenge the content of BCP and DRP with Kenya Power project team;  
• Walkthrough: The BCCM team can verbally go through the plan(s) and discuss how they would respond to 
an incident based on what has been documented in their plans. This allows the team to confirm the 
effectiveness of their plan and identify gap(s). 
• Table-top: The team can be presented with a pre-defined scenario and the participants role play with 
simulated responses and act out the steps. This exercise can be targeted at CMT to help foster team interaction 
and decision making. 
• Simulation: The BCCM teams are required to carry out activities in a simulated environment under 
conditions which would be prevalent in the event of an actual plan activation.  
• Live exercise: The team execute their plans in a live environment during operational hours.  
The objectives of the above-mentioned exercises are to: 
1. Validate recovery procedures,  
2. Familiarise Kenya Power Crisis Management Team members with their roles and responsibilities, and  
3. To identify areas of the plans that may need revisions.   
Note: It is important to recognise that Business Continuity Plans are working documents and need to be updated 
on a regular basis, especially when changes in the organisation occur (e.g. new divisions, new processes, change in 
personnel, etc.). This update will be regularly managed by the plan hol ders. 
 
BCP testing is a critical exercise for the overall program success. Normally BCP testing takes place after the annual 
plan review but before the final approval by CMT, so that testing verifies and corrects the most actual BCP version.  
 
Initiating BCP test 
First step the Business Continuity and Crisis Management Coordinator should do is to define and agree with CMT 
the test scope, scenario and timing. It is suggested to test realistic scenarios which on the one hand will let checking 
most critical restoration activities of each division and on the other require reasonable resources to perform. A 
simple scenario can be a good starting point. More complex and more specific scenarios may be tested during 
subsequent cycles. 
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 49 
 
Preparing BCP test protocol 
BCP test protocol is the main document describing what and how needs to be done during the test. The following 
critical information should be recorded in it: 
1) Test scenario – which situation is going to be drilled. 
2) Test participants (senior management, team members, staff, third-parties, etc.) 
3) Test type (whether services restoration will only be simulated in parallel with standard running ones or the 
normal office life will be interrupted during the test). 
Note: We recommend starting with so-called checklist and walk-through tests – paper exercises where participants 
sit together and review the list of proposed actions, and then move to the “parallel” testing – restore business 
processes during the test in parallel with the normally running ones. It is not mandatory to go with full-interruption 
tests since they may be quite painful for business. 
4) Checklist – actual sequence of actions with associated action owners and time frames. When preparing this 
section be realistic and practical – think what exactly will this and that division be doing in a real disaster 
situation. Involve Divisional representatives to prepare their sections. 
5) Restoration objectives – document how fast you expect services to be restored and how old data to get 
recovered. This may be taken from the BC plan as well as calculated for particular scenario.  
6) Further sections such as success and failure analysis as well as action plan are used after the test to document 
the outcome. 
The testing protocol document should be reviewed and conf irmed by all BCP team members (Divisional/ Regional 
representatives) as well as the Business Continuity and Crisis Management Coordinator and CMT. This will give 
formal approval for the test. 
Conducting the BC test 
Once the test scope, scenario and date are approved, and the testing protocol prepared, the BC test itself should be 
conducted. 
The duty of the Business Continuity and Crisis Management Coordinator is to make sure that all test participants 
are familiar with the test plan and they know what they have to do. During the test, he/ she must coordinate teams 
work and take notes of successes and failures of the plan steps execution. These notes should be recorded in the 
testing protocol in front of respective steps for further analysis.  
 
Finalise BCP testing protocol 
After the test completion, the Business Continuity and Crisis Management Coordinator should analyse recorded 
notes and summarize them in the success and failure analysis section. Then it makes sense to arrange a meeting 
with key test participants, review test outcomes and collect additional feedback and notes. Also, it is necessary to 
work out an action plan based on the lessons learnt. The action plan should be recorded in respective section of the 
testing protocol as well. Once the testing protocol is finalized and all the test outcomes as well as supposed 
corrective actions are recorded, the Business Continuity and Crisis Management Coordinator should sign the 
protocol by himself and seek the approval and sign off of CMT.  
Note: This is a must since the physically signed testing protocol is the best evidence for all types of the audits and 
external clients’ inquiries. The electronic version of BCP document and the signed and scanned testing protocol 
should be sent for archiving. BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 50 
 
3. Check  
3.1 Performance evaluation 
3.1.1 Monitoring, measurement, analysis and evaluation  
As part of this step, Kenya Power needs to determine: 
1. What needs to be monitored and measured within its BCCM programme,  
2. The different methods which would be used for monitoring, meas uring, analysing and evaluating, 
3. The time at which the monitoring and measuring would be performed and  
4. When the results from monitoring and measurement shall be analysed and evaluated.  
 
3.1.2 Internal audit 
The internal audit function of Kenya Power will undertake reviews at planned intervals to verify whether the BCCM 
is conforming to the requirements of Kenya Power, and is effectively implemented and maintained.  
 
3.1.3  Management review 
Kenya Power management needs to review the BCCM programme, at planned int ervals, to ensure its continuing 
suitability, adequacy and effectiveness. 
Plan component  Frequency of review 
BCCM policy Reviewed and updated every 6 months 
BIA Reviewed and updated at least once a year and/ or when there are signification changes to 
the business 
BCP Reviewed and updated at least once a year, when there are significant changes to the 
business and immediately after any exercise 
Contact lists Reviewed and updated every 3 months 
 BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 51 
 
4. Act  
4.1 Non-conformity and corrective action 
BCP correction 
The last step to be performed is implementation of agreed corrective actions (according to the action plan 
mentioned above) and respective adjustment of the BCP document. The Business Continuity and Crisis 
Management Coordinator should manage these activities. Once completed, the updated BCP version should be 
approved by CMT.  
This is the last step after which another cycle of BCP review and testing will take place.  
 
4.2 Continual improvement 
Kenya Power will need to continually improve the suitability, adequacy or effectiveness of the BCCM. 
Note: This can done through processes such as leadership, planning and performance evaluation.  
 
Plan component  Frequency of review 
BCCM policy Reviewed and updated every 6 months 
BIA Reviewed and updated at least once a year and/ or when there are signification changes to 
the business 
BCP Reviewed and updated at least once a year, when there are significant changes to the 
business and immediately after any exercise 
Contact lists Reviewed and updated every 3 months 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 52 
 
BCCM principles for Kenya Power 
 Recovery Procedures shall be made available within all critical sections/ divisions in order to ensure 
operational continuity in the event of a loss of service or disaster.  
 Each critical section/ division shall assign responsibility for the development and maintenance of their 
respective recovery procedures. 
 Events that can cause potential disruptions shall be identified and a risk -based approach shall be adopted for 
the development of the various BCP plans. 
 The interruption risks shall be informed by the Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) to guide the 
development of the business continuity and crisis management capability. The risk assessment process 
shall assist Kenya Power in identifying critical operational processes and key IT systems and their 
exposure to threats.  
 The Business Impact Analysis (BIA) shall be conducted to evaluate the impact of a disruption of the 
activities that support key services of Kenya Power. 
 BCP and DR plans shall be included in the systems development life cycle for all systems and applications that 
have been identified as critical, or that have a high availability requirement.  
 BCP and DR plans for critical systems and applications shall be tested on an annual basis. 
 Test results shall be provided to the information owner and/or information custodian, appropriate section/ 
division, and made available to the auditing party during any compliance audit.  
 Copies of all BCP and DR plans shall be stored off-site in a secure, fire-protected location that is easily 
accessible. Adequate protection shall be applied to electronic versions of the plan s, with appropriate controls 
applied restricting access only to authorised recovery team members of Kenya Power. 
 An alternative site or other processing arrangements shall be readily available in which to recover business 
critical IT operations in the event of a significant disaster or loss of service.  
 All roles and responsibilities within the BCP and DR plans shall be explicitly defined and attributable to specific 
individual(s). 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1- Templates 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 54 
 
Appendix 1.1: Business Continuity Plan Template 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 55 
 
Key concepts of the Business Continuity Plan 
Purpose The Corporate Business Continuity Plan (BCP) of Kenya Power is primarily 
designed to protect against the sudden loss of access to a facility or to systems 
necessary to conduct business caused by disasters such as fire, contamination, 
explosion, riots, sabotage, etc., and to minimise the impact if such an event does 
occur. 
The BCP has been documented with the purpose of enabling Kenya Power to 
recover its mission-critical business processes immediately following a disaster. 
There is limited time to plan for recovery in the immediate aftermath of a 
disaster, hence the need to plan and document in advance. However, Kenya 
Power management can discuss and prepare restoration strategy for less critical 
business processes after the disaster.  
If a facility is rendered inaccessible, it is expected that alternate work space for 
critical business functions will be identified and that these functions will be 
operational within 24 hours, in order to prevent a significant deterioration in 
the ability to restore operations and service customers. This will include 
planning for recovery of supporting networks, IT systems, people, records, and 
supplies.   
Alternate work space for less critical functions will follow. Temporary 
discontinuance of less critical business functions is expected to result in loss of 
efficiency during the first week given the focus in recovering critical business 
functions.  
Plan Objectives Note: Kenya Power should devise the objectives. The following has 
been provided for guidance purposes. 
The Business Continuity Plan's objectives are, in order of priority:  
1. to protect the life and safety of all persons; 
2. to minimise the impact on customer service; 
3. to minimise the loss of corporate assets; 
4. to establish priorities for, and allocate the use of, resources; 
5. to resume critical business functions with minimal outage within the 24 
hour recovery window; and 
6. to return to normal operations as soon as possible. 
Scope Note: We have provided the following for guidance purposes only. 
This is to be customised after the completion of the BIA exercise.  
The BCP covers all facilities and locations which house critical business 
processes. A listing of the facilities in scope is provided below.  
Sites identified as critical as they house critical business functions, people and IT 
assets:  
 National Control Centre BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 56 
 
 Main data centre in Stima Plaza 
 DR site, E-House 
It is possible that just one listed facility of Kenya Power will be affected by a 
disaster. Therefore, the plan is designed to be used in total, by facility, by specific 
work groups, as the circumstances dictate. 
Assumptions For plan development purposes, the following conditions are assumed:  
 all facilities in an area will not be affected at the same time; 
 qualified staff will be available to perform business functions; 
 business operations will not be as efficient as during normal operations;  
 alternate facilities will be available, and 
 all unaffected facilities will be operating under normal business conditions 
unless they become an alternate facility. 
Plan Components There are three major components to the Business Continuity Plan:  
 Emergency Response Plan (providing quick, effective and orderly response 
immediately following a major business disruption and will include 
evacuation and safety of staff, damage assessment and escalation to Crisis 
Management Team)  
 Crisis Management Plan (Organisation-wide capability grouping all senior 
management to assist in responding effectively to a crisis situation during 
and post crisis) 
 Divisional or Regional Recovery Procedures (processing guidelines outlined 
by each division or region for recovering and maintaining critical business 
functions during and after a disaster recovery period) 
This BCP should be used conjointly with the IT Disaster Recovery Plan, which 
focuses on resumption of critical IT systems.  
Crisis Management Team The Crisis Management Team (CMT) is the heart of the corporate response to a 
disaster. It comprises of all General Managers and the Managing Director of 
Kenya Power.  
This team is responsible for directing, coordinating, monitoring, controlling, and 
tracking the overall recovery operation, and for reporting recovery status to the 
Ministry of Energy and Petroleum and Government of Kenya.   
Human Resources Team Representatives of the Human Resources division serve on this team which is 
responsible for: 
 Notification of families of injured personnel 
 Medical crisis management 
 Trauma counselling 
 Emergency employee communications BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 57 
 
 Other miscellaneous human resources related issues  
Security team This team focuses on loss reduction and protection of Kenya Power assets 
(people and premises). In the time of crisis, the focus would be deploying extra 
security (if required) for the damaged sites/ affected areas to ensure staff 
security and protect Kenya Power premises- offices/ substations. This team may 
work with local authorities and/ or contractors to deploy extra forces on the fiel d. 
Transport/ fleet 
management 
This team would assist in the following: 
 Transport: provide transport for rapid intervention (if required) 
 Relocation to Alternate Site: manage logistics of relocating personnel to an 
alternate site and ensure that the necessary furniture and equipment are 
made available as detailed in the Recovery Procedures. 
Supply chain  In the time of crisis, this team may need to assist in the following: 
 Damage Assessment: evaluate the damaged site and account for all 
inventory. 
 Emergency procurement of materials (if any). 
Network Management 
Team  
The focus of this team is to take necessary actions to remediate/ reduce any 
power outage as quickly as possible. They need to ensure that power conveyance 
is maintained at optimal levels (if possible) or acceptable levels during a crisis. 
They need to maintain operations and management of the field areas, e.g. 
substations and power grid. 
Information Technology 
Team  
This team is composed of members of the IT division and is responsible for: 
 Setup of working environment for Crisis Management Team: ensure that the 
necessary workstations, LAN/WAN connections and equipment are setup for 
use by the Crisis Management Team as detailed in this BCP. 
 Recovery of all critical business applications and network connections 
including verification of data integrity. 
 Coordination of the systems recovery process. 
 Arranging for the transportation and distribution of electronic data and IT 
equipment to all users. 
 Recovery and continuous operation of all critical hardware platforms. 
 Planning and implementing the transition of systems operations from the 
alternate site to the restored site. 
Communications Team Representatives of the Corporate Communications section serve on this team, 
which is responsible for: 
 Development and dissemination of all external communication activities.  
 Coordination of emergency employee communication activities with Human 
Resources Department. BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 58 
 
 Establishment of a media communications centre near the damage site.  
Finance Team Representatives of the Finance section serve on this team and provide all 
financial related support for response and recovery activities. Responsibilities 
include: 
 Ensuring timely issuance of payroll checks. 
 Providing cash advances or salary advances where required. 
 Implementing any necessary short term tracking controls. 
 Liaise with risk- insurance for coordination of all insurance related issues. 
Plan Distribution Copies of the current plans will be distributed to: 
 Emergency Response Plan: All critical Kenya Power premises for 
Emergency Response Team 
 Crisis Management Plan: CMT  
 Recovery Procedures: Respective divisions or regions 
Distribution is based on the recovery responsibilities of the recipient, i.e. 
individuals will receive the plans they need to support their efforts in restoring 
the business functions of Kenya Power. 
 
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 59 
 
Appendix 1.2: Sample Notifications 
Key messages to be communicated during crisis 
A sample format for preliminary notification of the disaster to various stakeholders is given below: 
Sample Format for Notification for Power Outage (sample provided by Corporate 
Communications) 
 
Press Release 
Date  
National power outage 
At around xxxxx, the two transmission lines between the xxxxx geothermal load centre and xxxxx sub-station near 
Nairobi tripped, while they were carrying xxxxx MW of electricity. 
Subsequently, the national interconnected grid and generating system also tripped, causing a national power 
outage.  
Kenya Power engineers immediately commenced a ‘bl ackstart’ with electricity supplied from Uganda to Sondu 
Miriu power station. By the time of issuing this statement, electricity supply to the national grid had commenced 
with feeders in xxxxxx. 
Kenya Power will issue a comprehensive statement once it esta blishes why the two transmission lines tripped. We 
wish to apologise to our customers for the inconvenience and assure them that everything possible is being done to 
restore power as quickly as possible.  
ENDS……………………. 
For more information, contact: 
Kenya Power Corporate Communications Dept. 
Tel. 3201622/39or/47   
E-mail communications@kenyapower.co.ke 
BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 60 
 
Sample Format for Notification to Employees 
“We have suffered a minor / moderate /catastrophic disaster due to ___________. 
The extent of damage caused due to this incident is being assessed.  
The Crisis Operations Team is doing its best to resume normal operations at the earliest and with minimum 
damage to employees and the business. 
Further notification about developments in the wake of this incident, will be communicated through ________ 
(Media). 
Employees are requested not to discuss this incident with people outside Kenya Power.  
For further information, please contact ‐ (Name)______ at (Tel) ______.” 
 
Notification of Disaster to Banks, other institutions, general public and other stakeholders  
The CMT leader will notify the stakeholders of the disaster preferably by phone.  
A sample format for preliminary notification of Disaster is given below:  
Sample Format for Notification to Stakeholders 
“We have suffered a minor / moderate /catastrophic disaster due to ___________.  
The extent of damage caused due to this incident is being assessed.  
Kenya Power team is doing its best to resume normal operations at the earliest. We will keep you informed of any 
developments in the wake of this disaster.” 
 
Sample Format for Notification to Media 
Kenya Power operations have been disrupted due to a <fire, power outage, etc.>. The office building/ substation 
<specify location> has experienced some damage. Company officials, along with the different authorities are 
evaluating the extent of the damage and the probable cause. The business recovery plan of Kenya Power has been 
activated and is progressing according to schedule. Additional information will be provided when details are 
available….” 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 61 
 
Appendix 1.3: Crisis Management Team Meeting Agenda 
During an initial briefing about the crisis, the following specific agenda items will be reviewed:  
1. Situation report: 
a) What appears to have happened? 
b) Confirmed facts (when, immediate known consequences, likely consequences).  
c) Scope of proposed situation. 
2. Initial response status: 
a) What is being done, why, by whom? 
b) Likely implementation time and expected results. 
3. Initial communications status: 
a) Assess who needs to know immediately and later on? 
b) Alert the operator 
4. Short‐term response requirements: 
a) Delegate crisis communications responsibility. 
b) What must be done in the next several hours and how? 
c) What human and material resources are available or needed?  
5. Short‐term communication process: 
a) Staff, families, stakeholders, etc. 
6. Next meeting time. 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 62 
 
Appendix 1.4: INITIAL INCIDENT RESPONSE CHECKLIST 
Business disruption event (“incident”) occurs.  
First person to observe the event at Kenya Power notifies the Emergency Coordinator (“EC”) and 
the Damage Assessment Team (“DAT”) and/or the security guard of the premises impacted.  
The DAT assembles, investigates the incident using the DAT checklist, and determines if the 
Emergency Response Team (“ERT”) needs to be activated.  
If needed, the DAT will notify and activate the ERT. The ERT designates a point of contact which is 
the Liaison Officer (“LO”) for the incident. 
The EC determines if the situation requires that the LO informs CMT, based on inputs from the 
DAT and ERT. If it is necessary, the DAT through the LO also notifies public authorities such as 
police, ambulance, etc.  
 
If life and safety are at immediate risk, the EC and his/her staff should act first to ensure their own 
survival as well as the survival of all staff and then communicate when feasible .   
Assuming the situation warrants escalation, the EC & ERT review the situation and provide info to 
Crisis Management Team (“CMT”) to determine whether to initiate the disaster declaration 
process. 
 
If a disaster is declared, the ERT  
1. Activates the Crisis Management Team and Command Centre 
2. Launches Evacuation Procedures 
 
All Kenya Power employees are notified of the incident and of operational status.  
The emergency response and crisis management plan continue until the incident has been 
resolved.  
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 63 
 
Appendix 1.5: EMERGENCY RESPONSE TEAM TASK CHECKLIST 
Conduct an initial assessment of the incident’s likely impact on Kenya Power operations; 
coordinate with DAT.  
Gather information about the incident from first-hand contact, available first responders, 
employees and others (for e.g. Authorities, etc.); relays to Emergency Coordinator.  
  R isk 
Account for all employees and other people on premises.  
Administer first aid and/or ensure life/safety measures as appropriate.   
Inform building security and the property management firm (if any) if they are not already aware of 
the incident.   
Inform the EC as soon as possible.  
Assist the LO to disseminate information to Kenya Power employees on the incident and also keep 
them updated on the incident.  
Assist the LO to provide information about the incident to first responder organisations (For e.g. 
Ambulance, Fire Brigade, Police, Property Management Firm, etc.).   
Assist the LO to establish and maintain communications with the specific business unit.   
Provide input as directed to the disaster declaration process.  
If disaster is declared, support the Emergency Response Plan.   
If a disaster is not declared, support recovery from the incident and restore operations accordingly.   
Support the EC to activate Command Centre and invoke the CMT.  
Provide ongoing review and analysis of incident(s) with dissemination of information (assisting the 
LO/PIO) to staff and relevant stakeholders as needed.  
Coordinate with CMT, PTL, LTL as well as third-party organisations to ensure that required 
resources are in place and ready for delivery to affected venue and/or DR Site/Command Centre.   
Support PIO, SO and LO roles.  
Support management of the incident and restores operations accordingly.  
Support post-event demobilization plan/Restoration of Operations as needed.   
Assist EC as directed.  
Provide post-event report of activities.  
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 64 
 
Appendix 1.6: EMERGENCY RESPONSE TEAM MEETING 
CHECKLIST  
Contact EC to ensure that the ERT has set an initial meeting and venue. Ensure that the presence of 
ERT members is recorded using an Attendance Sheet (as provided in Appendix).  
Ensure that any missing ERT members, their alternates and any additional personnel are notified 
of the meeting. 
Refer to list of members of ERT, as well as key contact details in appendix for a complete list of 
ERT members and alternates and their contact information.  
 
Obtain a current situation report from the ERT and DAT.  
Address the following key issues: 
1. Type of event (fire, tornado, terrorism, power outage, telco outage, etc.)  
2. Specific location of event, if known (building, floor, side of floor, etc.)  
3. Magnitude of the event 
4. Time of event 
5. Suspected cause 
6. Emergency/evacuation procedures status 
7. Police and fire departments notified  
8. Injuries and fatalities 
9. Building access status (current access, near-term potential access) 
10. Immediate impact to business operations 
11. Potential for news media attention 
 
Establish schedule of updates for EC to monitor Evacuation procedures and also ongoing response 
to the incident. Commence providing EC updates.  
Ensure that a member of the ERT documents, in chronological order, incident milestones and 
actions taken using the appendix: business interruption template. This form will be used as a tool 
to update the ERT and/or EC and CMT. 
 
If required, provide advice to management whether employees should be sent home. The LO will 
develop a statement, determine method of communicating updates and communicate to employees 
after approval of Management. 
 
Follow up to ensure that the organisation’s phone lines are re-directed to the pre-assigned mobile 
phone and/or DR Site.  
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 65 
 
Appendix 1.7: EMERGENCY COORDINATOR TASK CHECKLIST 
Assumes overall leadership of all incident response activities.   
Receives information about the incident from ERT, DAT, first responders, employees and others; 
contacts the DAT (in the event the DAT has not yet been contacted).   
Leads the launch of the LO.  
Delegates the accounting for of all staff/guests on (and if applicable off) premises to the ERT.   
Ensures that first aid is being provided- ensure that life/safety measures are being delivered by the 
ERT.  
Informs CMT of situation as soon as possible.   
In coordination with DAT, assesses the incident’s likely impact on Kenya Power operations.   
If assessment of the incident suggests a serious event that could adversely impact operations, 
advises management as soon as possible.  
Provides input as directed to the disaster declaration process.  
Based on input from ERT and DAT, determines if/when to declare a disaster together with the 
CMT.  
If a disaster is declared, facilitates activation of Emergency Response Plan, informs the ERT and 
other BCCM team members, launches call notification (assisted by the LO and  PIO)by using 
contact details provided in appendix.   
 
If a disaster is not declared, manages recovery from the incident and restore operations 
accordingly.  
Leads the activation of the CMT; assumes role of EC.  
Leads the launch of PIO and SO.   
Ensures that PIO/LO establishes regularly updated communications with EC and other units as 
needed.  
Manages the incident and restores operations accordingly.  
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 66 
 
Appendix 1.8: EMERGENCY RESPONSE RECOMMENDATIONS 
The EC will develop recommendations for management on what overall response strategies should 
be implemented to facilitate the recovery of business operations in the most timely, efficient and 
cost-effective manner. 
 
Consider information gathered in earlier incident and damage assessments including, but not 
limited to, the following: 
 The area(s) affected by the disaster; 
 Anticipated duration of incident; 
 Availability of required employees; 
 Any special timing issues such as relationship to month-end, quarter-end, etc.; 
 Any special business issues (e.g. unusual business volume or backlog, unusual contractual 
obligations); 
 Regulatory obligations; 
 Salvageable equipment and supplies; 
 Availability of equipment and supplies at potential alternate or off -site locations; 
 Salvageable records required for recovery activities and 
 Records which require intensive reconstruction activities. 
 
Develop critical business function recovery priority lists for the following periods:  
 4 hours 
 8 hours 
 12 hours 
 24 hours or longer 
 
Recommend to the management the location(s) where critical business functions and IT operations 
can be recovered based upon the following priority:  
 Return to building 
 DR site 
 Other sites (if applicable) 
 
 
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 67 
 
Appendix 1.9: ACTIONS FOLLOWING A DISASTER DECLARATION 
Based on responses from the ERT, DAT and input from management and authorities, EC will 
launch an incident response plan that facilitates a safe and rapid evacuation of staff and locates the 
safest venue to activate CMT. 
Evacuation procedures of Kenya Power as appended to this plan will be followed. 
 
If not already identified, the EC should identify and communicate the recommended assembly 
site(s) to ERT members, CMT and the Divisional/ Regional Recovery Teams.  
Ensure that the ERT convenes a meeting to review response and recovery options, CMT setup 
procedures, and other related activities, as specified in the Emergency Response Plan.   
Relay the current situation report from the ERT.  
General points to be covered include the following: 
1. Type of event (fire, tornado, terrorism, power outage, telecomm outage, etc.)  
2. Specific location of event, if known (building, floor, side of floor, etc.) 
3. Magnitude of the event 
4. Time of event 
5. Suspected cause 
6. Emergency/evacuation procedures status 
7. Police and fire departments notified 
8. Injuries and fatalities 
9. Building access (current access, near-term potential access) 
10. Immediate impact to business operations 
11. Potential for media (e.g. television, radio) attention 
 
Establish a schedule together with the LO for updates to CMT.  
Assign an ERT member responsibility to document, in chronological order, incident milestones and 
actions taken using the template in the appendix. This form will be used as a tool to report to CMT.  
Provide input to the CMT whether employees should be sent home.  
The CMT will develop a statement, determine method of communication for further updates and 
communicate to employees, e.g. sending a text message or other approved service. 
 
The EC together with CMT will decide whether or not to re -direct the organisation’s phone lines to 
a pre-assigned mobile phone and/or DR Site.  
Assist with acquisition of resources as needed.  
Provide regular incident updates to ERT members and LO/PIO.   
Establish communications process/ timeline together with the PIO and LO.   
Coordinate phone calls, conference calls.  
 BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 68 
 
Appendix 1.10: PUBLIC INFORMATION OFFICER TASK CHECKLIST 
When activated, establishes communications with organizations as indicated in Emergency 
Response Plan, e.g. Emergency Coordinator, ERT, CMT, etc.  
Establish regular time frames for reporting incident and recovery status to designated 
organisations.  
Process incoming messages from and external organi sations, including police/ fire brigade and the 
media.  
Coordinate activities with Liaison Officer.  
Distribute approved messages to designated parties when directed.   
Assist ERT and Emergency Coordinator as directed.  
Provide post-event report of activities.  
 
Appendix 1.11: LIAISON OFFICER TASK CHECKLIST 
When activated, interface with any/all third parties as appropriate, e.g. police, fire, government 
agencies.   
Disseminate information and messages to appropriate departments and individuals.   
Coordinate activities with PIO.  
Assist Emergency Coordinator as directed.  
Provide post-event report of activities.  
 
Appendix 1.12: SAFETY OFFICER TASK CHECKLIST 
When activated, monitor and manages physical safety conditions.   
Develop measures to ensure safety of personnel.  
Assist in the administering of first aid and/or ensure life/safety measures as needed.   
Monitor CMT personnel for stress, and any medical attention required.   
Assist Emergency Coordinator as directed.   
Provide post-event report of activities.   
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 69 
 
Appendix 1.13: PLANNING TEAM LEADER TASK CHECKLIST 
When activated, prepare Emergency Action Plan.   
Maintain situation and resource status.  
Coordinate BCCM activities.   
Coordinate the preparation and dissemination of incident documentation.   
Provide location for subject matter and technical expertise.  
Prepare demobilization plan as needed.   
Assist Emergency Coordinator as directed.  
Assist in disseminating information and messages to appropriate departments  and individuals.  
Provide post-event report of activities.  
 
Appendix 1.14: LOGISTICS TEAM LEADER TASK CHECKLIST 
When activated, organise and coordinates the provision of services (HR, communications, medical, 
food, transportation and housing) and support (supplies, facilities and ground support) to the 
incident. 
 
Assist in disseminating information and messages to appropriate departments and individuals.   
Assist Emergency Coordinator as directed.  
Provide post-event report of activities.  
 
Appendix 1.15: OPERATIONS TEAM LEADER TASK CHECKLIST   
When activated, direct and coordinates all tactical operations associated with the incident.   
Assist in disseminating information and messages to appropriate departments and individuals.   
Assist Emergency Coordinator as directed.   
Provide post-event report of activities.  
 
Appendix 1.16: FINANCE TEAM LEADER TASK CHECKLIST 
When activated, facilitate various administration and financial activities.   
Monitor incident costs and maintains financial records.  
Address insurance and workmen’s compensation issues.  
Facilitate procurement activities, e.g., contracts.  
Monitor timekeeping and related activities.  
Disseminate information and messages to appropriate divisions and individuals.   BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 70 
 
Assist Emergency Coordinator as directed.  
Provide estimates of expenses that will be incurred for rebuilding the primary site to the CMT   
Provide post-event report of activities.  
 
Appendix 1.17: Annexure for ERP 
Annexure 1: Emergency Action Plan 
 Date/Time:  
Emergency name:  
Expected duration: (If 
known) 
 
Completed by:  
Objectives/strategies to be completed in the first 3 hours:   
Objectives/Strategies Responsibilities 
assigned to 
Assigned 
Date/Time Status Completed 
Date/Time 
     
     
     
     
Objectives/strategies to be completed in the first 8 hours:   
Objectives/Strategies Responsibilities 
assigned to 
Assigned 
Date/Time Status Completed 
Date/Time 
     
     
     
     
Objectives/strategies to be completed in the first 15 hours:   
Objectives/Strategies Responsibilities 
assigned to 
Assigned 
Date/Time Status Completed 
Date/Time 
     
     
     
     
Objectives/strategies to be completed in the first 24 hours & after:   BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 71 
 
Objectives/Strategies Responsibilities 
assigned to 
Assigned 
Date/Time Status Completed 
Date/Time 
     
     
     
     
 
Annexure 2: Emergency Evacuation Procedures 
Evacuation should be done immediately, in case an emergency calls for it.  
General pre‐events to be considered: 
1. Prepare “EXIT MAPS” indicating route from workstation to exit door and put them in a prominent location 
at each floor of the building. Make sure that routes are free of obstructions.  
2. “EXIT” must be clearly marked and easily accessible, with emergency lighting where appropriate.  
3. Appoint two or more fire marshals for each floor of the building to facilitate evacuation. He/ She must be 
someone: 
a. Who is in the office most of the time (whenever the office is open or in use),  
b. Who is level headed with steady nerves in an emergency and  
c. Who knows the names and faces of most or all the employees in the office?  
4. Designate a place outside the building where all employees and visitors are required to gather in case of 
emergency evacuation. 
5. Conduct periodic evacuation drills for effectiveness. 
 
Emergency steps when the alarm sounds: 
The Emergency Response Team will: 
1. Communicate the emergency situation to the Business Continuity & Crisis Management Coordinator.  
2. Liaise with outside agencies such as  
 Fire Brigade & Rescue:  
 Police:  
 Hospital:  
3. Direct all media related queries to the Crisis Communication Spokesperson.  
4. Maintain continuous communication with the Business Continuity & Crisis Management Coordinator and 
fire marshals. Arrange for the required medical facilities and emergency transport ation. 
5. Assume all command and responsibilities for bringing the event under control.  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 72 
 
6. Go to the alarm panel room immediately. Note the area of alarm. Dispatch the on duty security personnel 
to the area of alarm and monitor the situation. 
7. Decide whether evacuation is necessary. Set the fire alarm for the second time indicating the staff to 
evacuate the building.  
8. Declare the emergency situation to all employees with complete and clear information.  
9. Inform fire marshals to initiate evacuation procedures. 
10. Guide all employees to evacuate the building. 
11. Call fire marshals at the assembly point. 
12. Perform headcount and check with each fire marshal to make sure everyone is out.  
13. Give “ALL CLEAR” signal to employee after the incident has been averted.  
 
The fire marshals will: 
1. Take charge of the evacuation. 
2. Each fire marshal will see to it that a clear path to “FIRE EXITS” is maintained and the exits are clearly 
marked, and that personnel are familiar with the exits and the evacuation procedure.  
3. Direct the employees, consultants, visitors (all present in office premises) towards exit staircases.  
4. Make a quick check of all office spaces, restrooms, etc. to make certain that all personnel are out. Ensure no 
one is missed out in the evacuation. 
5. During evacuation, give preference to physically challenged people (if any). 
6. Instruct all to meet at the assembly point and take a headcount. 
7. Make sure that everyone is out of the office space and accounted for to the ERT during the headcount.  
8. If somebody is missing, immediately inform the authorities present onsite. 
9. Look into first aid and damage solutions if required. 
 
User Guidelines during evacuation 
What to do when one hears the evacuation announcement: 
After the first sounding, a security personnel will go to the fire area as designated on the fire panel to investigate. 
If the security personnel discovers a fire (which has got out of control), he will inform his colleague via the radio to 
press the evacuation button which sounds the alarm on a permanent basis and all persons in  the building should 
evacuate the building in an orderly manner under the instructions of the wardens.  
1. Upon hearing the first alarm, prepare yourself to exit the building.  
2. Upon hearing the second alarm, you shall proceed to the fire escape staircase on the respective floors upon 
receiving instructions from the fire marshals. 
3. Evacuate via the fire escape stairs unless otherwise advised by the fire marshals. BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 73 
 
4. Proceed carefully to assembly point at the ground floor. (Each building should provide exact details of assembly 
point and label them in advance). 
 
Assembly area 
In case of an emergency where evacuation is termed necessary, all the people (employees, consultants, visitors, etc.) 
should gather at the “assembly point” which is an identified point outside the premises of Kenya Power. The 
assembly point will be …………………… unless specified otherwise during evacuation. 
 
User guidelines during evacuation for people with special needs 
Being responsible for oneself is easy but the going can get tough for those with special needs. It is advisable to have 
members in the office, designated to one or more challenged person and take complete responsibility of her/him 
and self. 
 Evacuating people with special needs 
 Have a list of people with special needs, locate them and guide them 
 For the hearing impaired make a special notification 
 Have special evacuation devices to bring down the physically challenged  
On hearing the alarm 
 Designated special aides shall move towards the physically challenged persons and assist them in moving 
towards the safe assembly point. 
 If need be, fire marshals and aides can use special devices/ chairs/ stretchers. 
The security guard will: 
1. Ensure that the main gates of the building are open. 
2. Patrol the ground level of the building to give directions to emergency personnel and to be aware of anyone 
removing any physical property from the building. 
3. Not allow any visitor to enter the premises. 
4. Only allow personnel required during the emergency, fire -fighting staff of the fire brigade and police 
assistance. 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 74 
 
Appendix 1.18: Resumption-Back-To-Normal Checklist 
Sr. 
No 
Activity/ Task Responsibility 
1 Provide estimates of expenses that will be incurred for rebuilding the 
primary site to the CMT. 
DAT 
2 Determine the feasibility of returning to the original site. DAT 
3 Update the CMT about the status of the primary site. DAT/ ERT 
4 If the affected premises cannot be recovered or it will not become 
habitable within an acceptable time, make arrangement plan for a 
long‐term recovery option. 
Otherwise, authorize reconstruction and refit of affected premises.  
In case the primary site is not in a condition to be resumed back to 
normalcy, consider to continue operations from the DR site. In such a 
situation, the DR site will operate as the main site and another office 
should be prepared as the DR site or a new office site could be 
considered. 
CMT 
5 Receive instructions from the CMT whether operations should 
continue at the DR Site or at an alternate permanent location 
Recovery/ Resumption Team 
6 Liaise with the CMT and Recovery/Resumption Team on proposed 
refurbished site lay out. 
DAT 
 
Appendix 1.18: Repairs at the primary site checklist  
Sr. No Activity/ Task Responsibility 
1 Arrange for the insurance claim and reconstruction activities. CMT 
2 Hire and supervise the contractors to repair the damaged site.  DAT 
3 Obtain required building permits such as building safety and 
occupation permits. 
DAT 
4 Review the inventory of damaged equipment for types, model, and 
quantity as defined in the damage assessment form and place 
orders to replace equipment. 
DAT (in consultation with 
CMT) 
5 Receive and inspect ordered equipment. DAT 
6 Install power and LAN Cables, phone lines and furniture. Respective third party vendors 
7 Review network diagram and ensure proper location and 
connectivity of LAN infrastructure equipment such as servers and 
routers. 
Recovery/Resumption Team BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 75 
 
8 Install the critical IT systems. Recovery/Resumption Team 
9 Restore the data from tapes onto the servers. Recovery/Resumption Team 
10 Restore security systems including firewalls. Recovery/Resumption Team 
 
Appendix 1.19: Relocation to the Primary Site Checklist 
Sr. 
No 
Activity/ Tasks Responsibility 
1 Determine the time frame for transition. CMT 
2 Notify team of transition schedule and tasks. BCCM Coordinator 
3 Freeze production environment at the DR site. CMT 
4 Prepare shipments of vital records and documents to the primary 
site of Kenya Power. 
Recovery/Resumption Team 
5 Transfer team, data backups and vital records from the primary site. Recovery/Resumption Team 
6 Restore IT systems, applications and data at the primary site. Recovery/Resumption Team 
7 Verify IT environment such as network, application, data etc. Recovery/Resumption Team 
8 Redirect voice and data network to the primary site. Recovery/Resumption Team 
9 Resume normal operations. Recovery/Resumption Team 
10 Initiate normal backup procedures. Recovery/Resumption Team 
11 Destroy confidential data residing on the desktops at the DR 
facilities. 
Recovery/Resumption Team 
12 Remove/ discard confidential documents remaining at the DR site 
facilities. 
Recovery/Resumption Team 
13 Hold post‐incident review meeting and obtain written report from 
each Recovery Team. 
CMT 
14 Compile and submit insurance claims. CMT 
15 Update the respective plans. Plan owners 
 
 
 
 
 
 BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 76 
 
Appendix 1.20: Annexure for recovery teams procedures 
Annexure 1: Emergency Response Team members for each site 
Each of the following areas will have a primary and alternate member. The ERT members will have to be 
determined for each critical site.  
Emergency 
Response 
Team  
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile 
No 
Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-
kin 
       
Emergency 
Response 
Team  
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile 
No 
Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-
kin 
       
Emergency 
Response 
Team 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile 
No 
Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-
kin 
       
Emergency 
Response 
Team 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile 
No 
Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-
kin 
       
Emergency 
Response 
Team 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile 
No 
Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-
kin 
       
Emergency 
Response 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile 
No 
Alternate 
No 
Email BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 77 
 
Team Main        
Alt        
Next-to-
kin 
       
Emergency 
Response 
Team 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile 
No 
Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-
kin 
       
Emergency 
Response 
Team 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile 
No 
Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-
kin 
       
Emergency 
Response 
Team 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile 
No 
Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-
kin 
       
Emergency 
Response 
Team 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile 
No 
Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-
kin 
       
Emergency 
Response 
Team 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile 
No 
Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-
kin 
       
 BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 78 
 
The following roles will have to be determined for each critical site.   
Emergency Coordinator 
Emergency 
Coordinator 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
 
Public Information Officer 
Public 
Information 
Officer 
 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
 
Liaison Officer 
Liaison 
Officer 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
 
Safety Officer 
Safety Officer  Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 79 
 
Planning Team Leader 
Planning 
Team Leader 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
 
Damage Assessment Team members 
Each of the following areas will have a primary and alternate member. The DAT members will have to be 
determined for each critical site.  
DAT  Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
DAT  Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
DAT  Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
DAT  Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
DAT  Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
DAT  Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
 BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 80 
 
Logistics Team Leader 
Logistics 
Team Leader 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
 
Operations Team Leader 
Operations 
Team Leader 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
 
Finance Team Leader 
Finance 
Team Leader 
 Name Title Office No Home No Mobile No Alternate 
No 
Email 
Main        
Alt        
Next-to-kin        
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 81 
 
Annexure 2: Contact details for all key stakeholders 
The contact details for all key stakeholders (including law local authorities, government officials, and suppliers) are 
detailed below: 
Sr. 
No 
Name Title Office 
Number 
Home 
Number 
Mobile 
Number 
Alternate 
Number 
Email 
1        
2        
3        
4        
5        
6        
7        
8        
9        
10        
11        
12        
12        
13        
 
 BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 82 
 
Appendix 1.21: Annexure to DRP 
Annexure A: Contacts & their Responsibilities 
Emergency Response Contacts 
Name Title Contact 
Details 
Responsibilities 
  Work  
  Mobile  
  Email Address  
 
 
Key Kenya Power Personnel Contact Information (Primary Site- Stima Plaza) 
 
Name Title Contact 
Details 
Responsibilities 
  Work  
  Mobile  
  Email Address  
 
Key Kenya Power Personnel Contact Information (Secondary Site-xxxx) 
Name Title Contact 
Details 
Responsibilities 
  Work  
  Mobile  
  Email Address  
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 83 
 
Kenya Power Key Personnel Notification Calling Tree 
 
This is a communication chain for notifying specific individuals of an event. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Person 
Identifying 
Incident 
Primary Site 
Contacts 
Informed 
Secondary Site 
Contacts 
Informed  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 84 
 
External Contacts (Service Providers e.g. Technology Associates) 
 
Name Title/Company Service Provided Contact Details Responsibilities 
   Work  
   Mobile  
   Email Address  
 
 
External Contacts Calling Tree 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recovery Scenario 1: Total Data Centre Loss- Failover & Failback procedures 
 
Recover Scenario 2: Loss of a critical system or component 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 2- 
Considerations for 
building resilience in 
people  
  BCCM Framework  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 86 
 
Building resilience in your people 
Recommendations on ways of building capacity on critical functions within Kenya Power  
People- key asset for Kenya Power 
The key mandate of Kenya Power is to plan for sufficient electricity generation and transmission capacity to meet 
demand; building and maintaining the power distribution and transmission network and retailing of electricity to 
its customers.  
Kenya Power understands the need for the right people within its teams across the divisions to get the 
extraordinary done.  
The business impact analysis (BIA) exercise that would be undertaken when the business continuity and crisis 
management (BCCM) programme of Kenya Power is rolled out, would provide more insight into the critical people, 
skills and/ or teams (Talent) in the organisation. 
Recommendations to improve resiliency in critical skills 
We are providing within this document some recommendations for m aintaining core skills and knowledge; and 
building capacity on critical functions for the consideration of Kenya Power.  
This would help Kenya Power make sure it has the people and skills necessary, now and in the future, to achieve its 
business strategy. 
Some recommendations to protect and/ or build capacity on the critical skills include:  
1 
The need for updated documentation 
It is recommended that critical functions identified within the different divisions are required to 
establish clear documentation of the way in which critical activities are performed (where feasible). 
They should also put down lessons learnt, along with actions taken for past unusual situations/ 
incidents in Kenya Power. 
2 
Re-inforce workforce planning 
There is the need for Kenya Power to assess pivotal roles and key skills, undertake forecasting and 
demand modelling to create and sustain an effective organisation.  
Kenya Power may consider preparing a formal talent pipeline for the identified critical fu nctions. This 
will help Kenya Power understand whether it has the people with the right skills, the right knowledge 
and the right experience in the right places; now and over the next 3 to 5 years?  
This is to be updated on a regular basis with findings from internal and external analysis. 
3 
Talent Acquisition 
Kenya Power needs to establish a sourcing strategy reflecting on the improvement of its talent pool 
across the various divisions, the selection criteria and processes, the employer brand of Kenya Power 
in the market place and its onboarding programmes. 
Kenya Power may consider the following: 
• Engage university recruitment champions and university teams to hunt for talent to serve 
Kenya Power; 
• Plan, arrange and attend campus recruitment events and presentations at target universities/ 
institutes (e.g. Institute of Kenya Power);  
Kenya Power BCCM Framework             
PwC Strictly private and confidential 87 
 
 4 
Learning & Development  
Kenya Power needs to develop a formal learning and development framework to assess, monitor and 
enhance skills and capability in critical functions across the different divisions.  
There is the need to understand knowledge/ skills gap within the critical functions and subsequently 
establish formal coaching and mentoring programmes across Kenya Power to continuously enrich the 
identified talent. 
Few examples of methods to accelerate development of talent are as follows: 
• Customised in-house training based on gaps identified; 
• Attending interactive workshops, seminars and technical training sessions (e.g. those 
delivered by Global Sustainable Electricity Partnership); 
• Actively creating on the job learning opportunities (this includes but is not limited to day -to-
day coaching and feedback; work shadowing and mentoring; and proactively shaping roles to 
provide experience relevant to team members’ long-term career development). 
5 
Collaboration & Knowledge Management  
Kenya Power management needs to support collaboration and knowledge management. There is the 
need to manage and transfer knowledge within critical functions. Management needs to provide for 
approaches and tools for collaboration amongst the Kenya Power workforce. 
6 
Succession Planning  
Kenya Power needs to set formal career pathing for its employees. Succession and leadership plans 
need to be developed for the identified critical functions. Furthermore, job rotation programmes 
should be established to ensure a sustained source of pivotal talent and leadership (where feasible).  
    
© 2016 PricewaterhouseCoopers Limited (“PwC”). All rights reserved. In this document, “PwC” refers to PricewaterhouseCoopers in Kenya, 
which is a member firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited (PwCIL), each member firm of which is a separate legal entity and 
does not act as an agent of PwCIL. 
 
Limitation on 
Report Distribution 
This report has been prepared solely 
for your internal benefit and use. This 
report should not, without our prior 
written consent, be made available to 
any other third parties. Except where 
we have agreed expressly in writing to 
the contrary, PwC accepts no duty of 
care, no liability and no responsibility 
to any third party who benefits from or 
uses the Services or gains access to this 
report.  Any oral or draft reports which 
we provide, do not constitute our 
definitive findings and 
recommendations. These are contained 
solely in our final written report, which 
shall be expressed as such.  